Reflex was a 3D building design software application developed in the mid 1980s and - along with its predecessor Sonata - is now regarded as a forerunner to today's building information modelling applications. 1  2  3  4 
The application was developed by two former GMW Computers employees who had been involved with Sonata. After Sonata had "disappeared in a mysterious, corporate black hole, somewhere in eastern Canada in 1992," 5  Jonathan Ingram and colleague Gerard Gartside then went on to develop Reflex, bought for $30 million by Parametric Technology Corporation  in July 1996. 5  6 
PTC had identified the architecture, engineering and construction market as a target for its parametric modelling solutions, and bought Reflex to expand into the sector. However, the fit between Reflex and PTC's existing solutions was poor, and PTC's Pro/Reflex gained little market traction; PTC then sold the product to another US company, The Beck Group, in 1997, 7  a  where it formed the kernel of a parametric estimating package called DESTINI. 9  10 
Around the same time, several people from PTC set up a new company, Charles River Software  bought by Autodesk). 7  9  Leonid Raiz and Irwin Jungreis obtained from PTC a non-exclusive, source code development license for Reflex as part of their severance package. In the words of Jerry Laiserin: "While Autodesk Revit may not contain genomic snippets of Reflex code, Revit clearly is spiritual heir to a lineage of BIM 'begats' — RUCAPS begat Sonata, Sonata begat Reflex, and Reflex begat Revit." 11  unreliable source? 
In a 2017 letter to AEC Magazine, Jungreis said:
However, Ingram, in his 2020 book Understanding BIM: The Past, Present and Future, shows much of the functionality of Reflex is duplicated in Revit. 13  A 2022 account of the history of BIM by Kasper Miller asserts: "Reflex and Revit shared a myriad of features — so much so that it is fairly clear where the Revit team found much of its inspiration". 14 
Crotty, Ray . The Impact of Building Information Modelling: Transforming Construction. London: SPON/Routledge. ISBN 9781136860560.
Ingram, Jonathan . Understanding BIM: The Past, Present and Future. Abingdon: Routledge. ISBN 9780367244187.
This business software article is a stub. You can help Wikipedia by expanding it.