The Democratic Liberal Party of Armenia  ), was an Armenian political party established following the declaration of State Sovereignty of Armenia in July 1991. The party launched unification talks with the Armenakan-Democratic Liberal Party on 1 December 2011. On 3 June 2012, the general assembly of the party approved the unification and dissolving of the party into the new unified political party named Democratic Liberal Party  ՌԱԿ  . citation needed 
The ADLA should not be confused with the historical Armenian Democratic Liberal Party   ) also known as the Ramgavar Party, which is a powerful long-standing Armenian party in the Armenian diaspora established in 1885 by Mekertich Portukalian under the name Armenakan Party  and later named Democratic Liberal Party , although there were alliances between the ADL and ADLA parties.
The party was officially registered in July 1991 and took part in the Armenian Parliamentary elections held on 25 May 2003 and gained 2.9% of the popular vote, however, it was short of the minimum 5% threshold to be represented in the National Assembly. The party did not take part in the elections on 12 May 2007. The chairman of the Democratic Liberal Party of Armenia was Harutyun Mirzakhanian. citation needed 
The party, weakened with low election results decided not to take part in parliamentary elections in 2012.
In 2008, three smaller parties in Armenia dissolved into the Democratic Liberal Party of Armenia, namely citation needed :
Many members left to join other formations. The party also faced financial difficulties and selling of party assets. It also lost control of the Azg party organ. An ongoing internal dispute arose between party ranks, particularly between Edvard Andinyan and party secretary Arutiun Aragelyan. 1 
On 1 December 2011, the Democratic Liberal Party of Armenia signed an agreement with the Armenakan-Democratic Liberal Party for launching a unification process between the two parties. As a result of negotiations, a union was announced, Harutyun Mirzakhanian was reinstated president of the party and Aragelyan removed from the party. citation needed 
On 3 June 2012, a general assembly was held by Democratic Liberal Party of Armenia registered members. Merger and union with the Armenakan-Democratic Liberal Party was approved, followed by the decision to dissolve the Democratic Liberal Party of Armenia, in favor of launching the Democratic Liberal Party. citation needed 
Immediately following that, a joint general constituting assembly was held the same day and an official declaration of the new party was made. Twenty five members were elected as the party's pan-republican Central Committee with Hakob Avetikyan being elected as the general secretary of the party. 2 
