Washington, D.C., ada ana kiranta da District of Columbia anfi saninta da Washington ko D.C., itace Babban birninkasar Tarayyar Amurka. 1  Ankirkire ta bayan amuruka juyin juya hali amatsayin fadar gwamnatin sabuwar, sunan Washington ansa sane bayan sunan George Washington,  Shugaban Farko Na Tarayyar Amurka kuma Wadanda suka Kafa Tarayyar Amurka. 2  Amatsayin ta na fadar Gwamnatin Tarayyar Amurka  da kuma ma'aikatu na duniya da dama, Washington nada muhimmanci a duniyar siyasa babbar birnin kasal. 3  Birnin na daya daga cikin mafi yawan ziyarta a duniya, fiye da mutane  miliyan 20 ne ke ziyartar birnin a duk shekara. 4  5 
Sa hannun da akayi na Residence Act a July 16, 1790 ita ta amince da kafa capital district yakasance a Potomac River a gabar kasar na East Coast. Kundin Tsarin mulkinn kassr yasamar da federal district a karkashin exclusive jurisdiction na U.S. Congress, da kuma cewar District din kafa yakasance bangaren kowace jiha. The states of Maryland and Virginia each donated land to form the federal district, which included the pre-existing settlements of Georgetown and Alexandria. The City of Washington was founded in 1791 to serve as the new national capital. In 1846, Congress returned the land originally ceded by Virginia; in 1871, it created a single municipal government for the remaining portion of the District.
Washington nada yawan Mutane da aka kiyasta kusan 702,455 as of Yuli 2018 update , 6  making it the 20th most-populous city in the United States. Commuters from the surrounding Maryland and Virginia suburbs raise the city's daytime population to more than one million during the workweek. 7  The Washington metropolitan area, of which the District is the principal city, had a 2017 estimated population of 6,216,589, 8  the sixth-largest metropolitan statistical area in the nation.
Dukkanin rassa uku na Gwamnatin Amurka nada cibiyoyinsu ne a the District: congress , president , and the U.S. Supreme Court . Washington is home to many national monuments and museums, primarily situated on or around the National Mall. The city hosts 177 foreign embassies as well as the headquarters of many international organizations, trade unions, non-profit, lobbying groups, and professional associations, including the World Bank Group, the International Monetary Fund , the Organization of American States, AARP, the National Geographic Society, the Human Rights Campaign, the International Finance Corporation, and the American Red Cross.
A locally elected mayor and a 13‑member council have governed the District since 1973. However, Congress maintains supreme authority over the city and may overturn local laws. D.C. residents elect a non-voting, at-large congressional delegate to the House of Representatives, but the District has no representation in the Senate. The District receives three electoral votes in presidential elections as permitted by the Twenty-third Amendment to the United States Constitution, ratified in 1961.
Birnin Washington DC a shekarar 1998
Wani layi a birnin Washington DC
Pennsylavani a birnin Washington DC dake USA
Birnin Washington DC
US Capital West side
Birnin Washington a shekarar 2007
