Nancy Jane Jimenez Castiglione is a half-Filipina, half-Canadian model, actress, host, singer and a recording artist. Her presence is rampant in the entertainment industry, popularly called as Nancy Castiglione but now she is slowly using “Nancy Jane”.
Nancy Jane was born to a Filipino mother and a Canadian father of Italian descent on February 24, 1981. She was raised in Canada and was able to take up Political Science in the University of Monitoba. She gave birth to fraternal twins named Mateo and Joaquin.
Nancy visited her Philippine roots on year 2000, not planning for career but she’s here for vacation. However, her trip turned out to be the initial stepping stone for her renown. Under no circumstances, Nancy was able to fascinate a certain talent scout with her undeniable charm and beauty and was immediately offered her to star in a commercial.
Her first commercial, the Red Horse Beer displayed the very cute, naughty and seductive Nancy which served as catalyst to her strongly-established reputation. Since then, she had been appearing many commercials and eventually became one of the most-sought endorsers of many products.
This stint also paved way for her modeling career. Her descent and her unique persona plus a flawless body made her an in-demand model and subject to many widespread magazines such as Maxim and FHM. Her sexiness was visible in men’s magazines like FHM where she posed as cover girl twice and ranked as the second sexiest woman in the Philippines in Uno’s Magazine 2007.
Commercial after commercial, Nancy became a household face and won the affection of millions of millions of Filipinos. In a short period of time, she graced the television as guest initially in Magandang Tanghali Bayan.
GMA 7 contracted and launched her as one of the mainstream actresses in the TV series, Sana’y Ikaw Na Nga of Dingdong Dantes and Tanya Garcia. Her exemplary acting performance qualified her for the award as Best New Female Actress in the Star Awards.
Nancy eventually appeared in almost all the shows of GMA Network. She played several roles in which she complied in good faith. Her hosting skills were also tested when she co-hosted the first ever Starstruck, a talent search for new artists of GMA 7. Aside from being an in-demand host in several shows, she also had her glory days as VJ in music channels.
She starred for the first time in movie with Piolo Pascual and Joyce Jimenez in “I Think I’m In Love”. She as well played the role of “Muyak”, a tinkerbell-sort-of-fairy in Mulawin which acquired the interest of the children.
Nancy is a type of person who keeps on trying different fields and courageously engages new undertakings. After taking some hiatus from limelight, Nancy reinvents herself and found solitude reflecting on the things she wanted to do in the future. She doesn’t want to be packaged as an actress or host only. Like any other artists, she wants some fresh breaks.
On her reemergence, Nancy has turned into something unbelievable. She is now repackaged as a singing and dancing diva though she still engages in acting and modeling.
