Badges of the United States Air Force are specific uniform insignia authorized by the United States Air Force that signify aeronautical ratings, special skills, career field qualifications, and serve as identification devices for personnel occupying certain assignments. 1 
Most Air Force badges are awarded in three degrees or skill levels. Aeronautical rating badges for pilots, combat systems officers, observers, and air battle managers are awarded at basic, senior, and command levels; while flight nurses and flight surgeons are awarded ratings at the basic, senior, and chief levels.  All other aviation badges are awarded at the basic, senior, and master levels.  Air Force cccupational badges are normally issued in basic, senior, and master level for officers. A star and wreath system, worn above the Air Force badge, denotes which degree or skill level a service member currently holds. Previously, enlisted wear the basic badge after completing technical school, the senior badge after award of the 7-skill level, and the master badge as a master sergeant or above with 5 years in the specialty from award of the 7-skill level.  For non-rated commissioned officers, the basic badge is awarded after completion of technical training, the senior badge after 7-years in their respective AFSC, and master at 15-years. Now most career feild CFETPs denote the requirements for awarding each level.  1 
Chaplain, aeronautical, space, cyberspace, and missile operations badges, along with the Air Force Commander's Insignia are mandatory for wear on Air Force uniforms. With the most recent changes to Air Force uniform regulations, restrictions have been lifted on the wear of other service's skill badges that airman have earned. Precedence of badges within the same category depends on the airman's current assignment. 1  2 
The Air Force is the most restrictive service with regards to which Air Force badges may be worn on the uniforms by other branches of the US Armed Forces.  Most badges issued exclusively by the Air Force may only be displayed on Air Force uniforms.  The exception to this rule is the Space Operations Badge. 1  3 
The Air Force previously authorized continued use of a number of aviation badges originally issued by the U.S. Army during World War II.  Such badges are no longer authorized and are now categorized as obsolete badges.
Sources: 1  4 
Pilot Badge
Remotely-Piloted Aircraft Pilot Badge
Navigator / Combat Systems Officer / Observer Badge
Air Battle Manager Badge
Flight Surgeon Badge
Astronaut Badge 
Flight Nurse Badge
Aircrew Badge 
Aircrew Badge 
An Air Force Occupational Badge is a military badge of the United States Air Force which is awarded to those members of the Air Force community who are engaged in duties "other than flying".  The purpose of the Air Force Occupational Badge is to denote and recognize training, education and qualifications received in a particular career field and to provide recognition in an outwardly displayed badge. 1  5 
The first Air Force Occupational Badges began appearing on Air Force uniforms in the late 1950s.  Prior to this time, the only Air Force badges authorized were the Pilot Badge and other aeronautical rating badges, such as the Navigator Badge and Flight Surgeon Badge.
Space Operations Badges *
Cyberspace Operator Badge*
Multi-Domain Warfare Officer Badge 6 
Weather and Environmental Sciences Officer Badge 7 
Meteorologist Badge
Operations Research Analyst Badge 8 
Information Operations Badge 9 
Operations Support Badge
Command and Control Badge
Weapons Director Badge
Air Traffic Control Badge
Missile Operations Badge
Radar, Airfield, & Weather Systems Badge
Intelligence Badge*
Safety Badge 10 
The following operations insignia are worn as beret crests on specific Air Force berets instead of the left breast of Air Force uniforms.  Both the breast insignia and the following beret crests signify the same thing, an Air Force specialty. 11 
Special Tactics Officer Crest
Combat Controller Crest
Special Reconnaissance Crest
Tactical Air Control Party Flash and Crest
Combat Rescue Officer Crest
Pararescueman Crest
Survival, Evasion, Resistance and Escape Crest
Munitions Badge 12 
Maintenance Badge
Missile Maintenance Badge
Logistics Readiness Badge
Supply and Fuels Badge
Transportation Badge
Logistics Plans Badge
Administration Badge
Cyberspace Support Badge *
Band Badge
Public Affairs Badge
Historian Badge
Manpower and Personnel Badge 
Emergency Management Badge
Civil Engineer Badge
Services Badge 
Force Support Badge 
Force Protection Badge
Judge Advocate Badge
Chaplain Badges 
Paralegal Badge 
Religious Affairs Airmen Badge 
Acquisition and Financial Management Badge*
Medical Corps Badge
Enlisted Medical Badge
Biomedical Science Corps Badge
Nurse Corps Badge
Dental Corps Badge
Medical Service Corps Badge
Scientific Applications Specialist Badge 13 
As of 17 January 2014, Airmen are authorized to wear any qualification/skill badge they have earned on Air Force uniforms.  With the exception of the new Air Force Combat Diver Badges, the other qualification badges listed in this section are specifically awarded by the Air Force as well as other armed services of the U.S. Department of Defense. 1  4 
Air Force Combat Diver Badges 14 
Explosive Ordnance Disposal Badges 
Parachutist Badges 
Freefall Parachutist Badges 
Parachute Rigger Badge
Sources: 1 
Headquarters Air Force Badge
Commander's insignia*
Air Education and Training Command Instructor Badges
Air Force Professional Military Education Badge
Air Force Junior Reserve Officers' Training Corps Instructor Badge
Permanent Professor USAF Academy Badge*
Air Force Recruiting Service Badges
Air Force Reserve Recruiting Service Badges
Air Force Honor Guard Badge
Air Force Base Honor Guard Badge
Air Force Special Agent Badge
Security Forces Badge
Department of the Air Force Law Enforcement Badges 
Fire Protection Badges
Air Force Inspector General Badge
Sources: 1  16 
Air Force Marksmanship Competition Badges
Outstanding Airman badge
National Guard Bureau Organizational Badge
Air National Guard Recruiter Badges
Chief's 50 Marksmanship Badge 17 
Adjutant General's Twenty Combat Badge  18  19 
Governor's Twenty Tab 20  21  22  23 
Governor's Twelve / Dozen Tab 24  25  26 
Governor's Ten Tab 27 
