
Twist and Shout  is a 1984 Danish drama film directed by Bille August. It was entered into the 14th Moscow International Film Festival where Lars Simonsen won the award for Best Actor. 2  The film saw a release in American theaters in 1986. 1  Twist and Shout was also selected as the Danish entry for the Best Foreign Language Film at the 58th Academy Awards, but was not accepted as a nominee. 3 
The film is adapted for the screen from the novel "Når snerlen blomstrer" by Bjarne Reuter. The story is part of a trilogy and is a sequel to the 1983 film Zappa; the story is followed by the novel "Vi der valgte mælkevejen". Twist and Shout revolves around a bunch of young people in the 1960s suburbs of Copenhagen.
The plot follows two best friends, Bjørn  and Erik , and their coming-of-age in 1963 Denmark against the backdrop of The Beatles becoming an overnight sensation throughout Europe. Bjørn is pursued by Kirsten , who has her mind set on marriage, but Bjørn instead falls for Anna . The somber Erik cares for his home-bound mentally ill mother while his strict father rules his life. Erik desires Kirsten, but she's unattainable to him. Pregnancy, a horrific illegal abortion, an engagement party, and a revelation about the rectitude of Erik's father leads to a climax of events, and Bjørn and Erik must stand up to controlling adults. 4  
The film has a score of 80%, based on 5 reviews, on review aggregate site Rotten Tomatoes. 5  In a brief mixed review, Roger Ebert awarded the film two and a half stars. 6  Critic Desson Howe noted although there was nothing particularly special about the film's plot, the on-screen charisma of the four young leads elevated the film. 7  Janet Maslin of The New York Times gave a positive review, writing both Zappa and Twist and Shout "draw their strength from the portrait of an arid, conventional Danish society that Mr. August uses as these stories' implicit backdrop". 1  Michael Wilmington of The Los Angeles Times also praised the film and said it gives "a realistic look at adolescent love and its harrowing consequences, a stark portrayal of the horrors of family life, and a bitter but clear-eyed look at social barriers, the dangers of compromise and the vulnerable bonds of friendship". 8  
