
The 2020 Miami Hurricanes football team  represented the University of Miami during the 2020 NCAA Division I FBS football season. The Hurricanes were led by second-year head coach Manny Diaz and played their home games at Hard Rock Stadium, competing as a member of the Atlantic Coast Conference .
In 2019, the Hurricanes began the year unranked in the AP Poll and were voted in the preseason polls 2nd to win the Coastal Division. The Hurricanes started off slow, winning 2 of their 5 games. The Hurricanes went on to win their 4 of their next 5 games but lost 3 of their final games. In the postseason, the Hurricanes were selected to play against the Louisiana Bulldogs in the 2019 Independence Bowl, which they lost 14–0.
Four Miami players with remaining eligibility declared early for the 2020 NFL Draft. In addition, 10 seniors from the 2019 team graduated.
Outgoing
 
Quarter Back
Tailback
Wide receiver
Placekicker
Punter
Tight end
Offensive line
Defensive linemen
Linebacker
Defensive back
Long snapper
Projected Depth Chart 2020:
  
    
    
      
      
      
 
True Freshman
Double Position : *
Miami will host four ACC conference opponents: Florida State, Pittsburgh, Virginia, and North Carolina to close out the ACC regular season. Miami will travel to five ACC conference opponents: Louisville, Clemson, NC State, Virginia Tech, and Duke. Miami is not scheduled to play ACC opponents Notre Dame, Boston College, Wake Forest, Georgia Tech, and Syracuse. The Hurricanes bye week originally came during Week 5 . However, due to COVID-19 problems in the organization, they had bye weeks during Week 12  and Week 13 .  Also due to COVID-19 problems, their game between Wake Forest and Georgia Tech were canceled. 1 
Miami had games scheduled against Michigan State, Temple, and Wagner, which were all canceled before the start of the 2020 season due to the COVID-19 pandemic. 2  3  On July 29, the ACC announced every non conference game except one would be played in the 2020 season.
The ACC released their schedule on July 29, with specific dates selected on August 6. 2 
at Hard Rock Stadium • Miami Gardens, Florida
No scoring plays
at Cardinal Stadium • Louisville, Kentucky
at Hard Rock Stadium • Miami Gardens, Florida
at Memorial Stadium • Clemson, South Carolina
at Hard Rock Stadium • Miami Gardens, Florida
at Hard Rock Stadium • Miami Gardens, Florida
at Carter-Finley Stadium • Raleigh, North Carolina
With the win, the Hurricanes became bowl eligible for the 8th straight season. 5 
at Lane Stadium • Blacksburg, Virginia
at Wallace Wade Stadium • Durham, North Carolina
at Hard Rock Stadium • Miami Gardens, Florida
at Camping World Stadium • Orlando, Florida
