Gachon University is an academic institute located in South Korea. The current structure of Gachon university is the result of a merger between four existing universities. Gachon University of Medicine and Science and Gachon-gil College merged in 2007, Kyungwon University and Kyungwon College merged in 2007, and Gachon University of Medicine and Science and Kyungwon University merged in 2012. 1  Gachon University has three campuses for undergraduates, the Global Campus  located in Seongnam, satellite campuses on Ganghwa Island and in Yeonsu-dong, and the School of Medicine in Guwol-dong, Namdong-gu, Incheon, South Korea. 2  Gachon University signed a strategic partnership with Hawaii Pacific to allow students to study abroad. 3 
In 1982, Kyungwon University, a four-year college, was established with the foundation of Kyungwon Academy established in 1978. In October 1987, Kyungwon University was promoted to a university with 6 colleges. In November of the same year, Kyungwon University established a general graduate school, followed by a graduate school of education and a graduate school of government and a doctoral program.
In 1989, the Oriental Medicine Department was newly established at Kyungwon University. In December 1992, the Seoul Oriental Hospital was opened in Songpa-gu, Seoul.
In 1990, the College of Science and Technology was separated into the College of Science  and the College of Engineering.
In 1992, the College of Art was separated into the College of Art  and the College of Music.
In 1998, Kyungwon University, which suffered from management difficulties, was taken over by the Gachon Gil Foundation. In 2000, the Gachon Gil Foundation's Chairman Lee Gil-in took office.
In 1998, Kyungwon University was selected as the best university in all areas in the comprehensive evaluation of the university and the best university in the evaluation of educational reform. In 2001, Kyungwon University established the first software university in Korea and the only college of Oriental medicine was established in Gyeonggi Province. With the efforts of internationalization, Kyungwon University has entered into an exchange agreement with many famous universities abroad. 
In 2011, the university signed an agreement with Hawaii Pacific University allowing Gachon students to study at HPU. 4 
Gachon University was ranked 30th among Korean universities and 852nd in the world by Center for World University Rankings for the 2018-2019 period. 5 
