Hans Otto Jung  was a German viticulturist, jazz musician and patron of music. In the 1940s, he played as a pianist in the Hotclub Combo, which he cofounded with Emil Mangelsdorff and others. In 1987, he was a cofounder of the Rheingau Musik Festival. With his wife Ursula Jung, he sponsored cultural initiatives in the Rhein-Main region.
Born in Lorch, Jung grew up in a musical family; his father Carl Jung, a viticulturist, organized regular chamber music concerts in Rüdesheim, with notable performers and composers who were personal friends of the family. 1  2  Paul Hindemith composed a ragtime to congratulate to the birth of Hans Otto, titled Young Lorch Fellow. Ragtime. 3 
Jung learned to play the piano with Emma Lübbecke-Job  de  among others, and later the violin and the viola, 4  performing in public for the first time in 1935. He studied social sciences in Frankfurt. 4  As a student, he cofounded the Hotclub Combo  de  in 1941, playing as the group's pianist with Carlo Bohländer  de , Emil Mangelsdorff, Hans Podehl  de  and Charly Petry. 5  In 1943, he also learned to play the double bass, and served as the group's bassist from 1945 to 1948 in the Hotclub Sextet. The broadcaster Hessischer Rundfunk aired in 1946/47 a show with him as the solo pianist, 3  playing in the style of Teddy Wilson. citation needed 
He completed his studies with a Ph.D. in business administration . He directed the family's winery, 2  which focused on the production of alcohol-free wines and brandy, but still often listened to jazz concerts and chamber music concerts in the Rhein-Main region. He often invited performers, especially pianists, to play at his residence Boosenburg, where he had two Steinway pianos. 2 
Jung was the president of the Wiesbaden association of artists and art lovers  from 1976. 6  In 1987, he was a cofounder and patron of the Rheingau Musik Festival. 2  Together with his wife Ursula, a historian, he was a patron of culture in the region, sponsoring institutions such a chamber music series and "Brahmstage" in Rüdesheim, the concert series "Die Kammermusik" in Wiesbaden, 6  and Dr. Hoch's Konservatorium and the Hochschule für Musik und Darstellende Kunst in Frankfurt. citation needed 
He had an accident in the winter 2008/09 when he attended a concert of his friend Menahem Pressler in Hamburg, and died in Rüdesheim. His jazz collection of periodicals, manuscripts, and correspondence is held by the Jazzinstitut Darmstadt  de . 7  His residence still serves as a location of regular jazz and chamber music concerts, organized by his son Edu and the town of Rüdesheim. 2 
