
Westville is an area in KwaZulu-Natal, South Africa, and is just west and 10 km inland from the Durban CBD. It was a formerly independent municipality however it became part of the eThekwini Metropolitan Municipality in 2002.  
The climate is subtropical; Westville experiences mild, dry winters, and hot, humid summers with frequent late afternoon downpours. 
The settlement began in 1847 as the farm "Westville" . In March 1848 a group of Germans, brought out by Jonas Bergtheil, arrived in Port Natal to settle the area and farm cotton. 2  They established several farms both in Westville and neighbouring New Germany , and were a tight-knit community. The Westville settlers would travel through Palmiet Valley on Sundays to attend the Lutheran Church in New Germany. When their cotton crops failed the first year, settlers were granted permission to farm other crops like potatoes, mielies , barley and oats. The city of Durban provided a ready market for their produce.   
The 'German House' owned by the Lange family on what is today Jan Hofmeyr Road became an important stopover for those travelling the Old Main Road between Durban and Pietermaritzburg. The Outspan Tree alongside the hostelry is now a national monument. The Bergtheil Museum, located on what is today 16 Queen's Avenue, was built in the 1840s and is the oldest remaining house in Westville. It offers visitors an idea of early settler dwellings and farming practices.
The 1850s saw the addition of Scottish and English settlers to Westville. In the 1870s, Indian market gardeners moved into the area too. In time, the German settlers integrated with other settlers and began to speak English.
Westville was proclaimed a borough in 1956. citation needed  It was incorporated into the eThekwini Metropolitan Municipality, along with Durban and various surrounding towns, suburbs and villages as part of the post-apartheid re-organisation of South Africa's municipalities.
Topographically, Westville is located within a hilly region between the uMbilo River  and the Palmiet River  and sits just above the coastal city of Durban at an elevation of between 107m  and 300m  above sea level. 3  
Westville is bounded by Queensburgh to the south, Clermont to the northwest, Pinetown to the west and by the neighborhoods of the city of Durban: Reservoir Hills to the north and Sherwood to the east. The town is also centrally located to a few surrounding townships, namely Cato Manor, Clermont and Chesterville.
Westville, along with Westville proper encompasses the following 6 suburban areas: 2 
The central business district  of Westville lies towards the western part of the town and just south of the M13 highway. Westville Road and Church Road are the two main streets through the CBD. 
The northern suburbs of Atholl Heights, Chiltern Hills, Dawncrest, Grayleigh are collectively known as "Westville North". The southern suburbs of Westville include Dawncrest and Berea West.
Schools situated in Westville include Star College Durban Westville Boys' High School, Westville Girls' High School, Atholl Heights Primary School, Berea West Junior Primary School, Berea West Senior Primary School, Pitlochry Primary School, Westville Senior Primary and the Deutsche Schule Durban. Higher education centres include a 2-square-kilometre campus of University of KwaZulu-Natal  and Varsity College .
Specialist schools such as The International Hotel School, based at the Westville Hotel, and The Fusion Cooking School can also be found in Westville.
There are several churches in Westville, including the Westville Methodist Church on 38 Jan Hofmeyr Road, 5  Our Lady of Lourdes Catholic Church on 14 Westville Road, the Westville Baptist Church on 2 Church Place, 6  St Elizabeth's Anglican Church on 45 Salisbury Avenue, and OneCity Church, which meets at the Westville Country Club. 7  Mosques in Westville include Habibia Soofie Masjid, a Soofie mosque, on 119 Jan Hofmeyr Road, and the Westville Jaame Musjid on 46 Meerut Road.
Westville boasts multiple business parks such as West Way Office Park and Essex Gardens amongst others, with others concentrated on Lancaster/Buckingham Terrace in the town centre and Essex Terrace and University Road near Westwood Mall, in the east of Westville. These business parks are home to small businesses and huge corporations alike, most notably the headquarters for companies such as RCL Foods, Boxer Superstores, The Unlimited insurance company, Vector Logistics and the regional electricity supply offices of ESKOM.
Westville is one of the most significant retail hubs within the Greater Durban metropolis with four shopping centres serving the town varying from large regional shopping centres to small suburban shopping centres. The most prominent shopping centre is The Pavillion Shopping Mall, a regional shopping centre located to the south of Westville along the N3 highway and is categorised as the second largest shopping centre in the Greater Durban region after Gateway Theatre of Shopping in uMhlanga . The second largest shopping centre is the Westwood Mall, lying to the east of Westville along the M13 highway. The remaining two shopping centres are located in the town centre of Westville and include the local shopping centres of Westville Mall and Westville Junction Shopping Centre.  
Tourist attractions include Palmiet Nature Reserve, which has 15 kilometres of guided and self-guided trails. Further afield tourists can experience the evergreen Western Inland Route and Natal's regional attractions, including the Drakensberg  Battlefields Tours, game reserves and Zululand. A large Anglo-German Historical Route exists with numerous churches, museums and grave sites depicting the early settlement struggles of the early colonial days.
Westville is solely served by the Life Westville Hospital, a private hospital owned by Life Healthcare Group, located south of the N3 and adjacent to The Pavillion Shopping Centre. 8 
Westville Prison, which sits on the edge of Westville, is one of the largest prisons in the country and the only prison located in the Greater Durban area.  
Westville is highly accessible by freeways – intersected by a network of four major freeways that service the Greater Durban metropolitan area including the N2, N3, M13 and M19:    
The M32 metropolitan route is a smaller local artery which traverses through Westville as Harry Gwala Road, St James Avenue, Attercliffe Road, Jan Hofmeyr Road and Rodger Sishi Road and leads in a westerly and southwesterly direction from New Germany to the suburbs of Glenwood and Congella in Durban. 
