 
 
Events in the year 2002 in Iraq.
The CIA's Special Activities Division  teams were the first U.S. forces to enter Iraq in July 2002, prior to the US Invasion.  Once on the ground, they prepared for the subsequent arrival of US Army Special Forces to organize the Kurdish Peshmerga. In Operation Viking Hammer, this joint team ) 1  combined to defeat Ansar al-Islam, an ally of Al Qaeda, in the North East corner of Iraq. This battle was for control of a territory that was occupied by Ansar al-Islam and was executed prior to the invasion.  It was carried out by Paramilitary Operations Officers from SAD and the Army's 10th Special Forces Group.  This battle was a significant defeat of a key terrorist organization and the uncovering of a chemical weapons facility at Sargat. 1    Sargat was the only facility of its type discovered in the Iraq war. 2  3 
SAD teams also conducted missions behind enemy lines to identify leadership targets.  These missions led to the initial strikes against Saddam Hussein and his Generals.  Although the strike against Saddam was unsuccessful in killing him, it was successful in effectively ending his ability to command and control his forces.  Other strikes against his Generals were successful and significantly degraded the command's ability to react to, and maneuver against the US led invasion force. 1  4   SAD operations officers were also successful in convincing key Iraqi Army officers into surrendering their units once the fighting started. 5 
Turkey refused to allow the US Army entry into Northern Iraq.  Therefore, joint SAD and Army Special forces teams and the Kurdish Peshmerga were the entire Northern force against Saddam.  They managed to keep Saddam's Army in place rather than moving the northern army to contest the US led coalition force coming from the south.  The efforts of the Kurds, SAD and 10th Special Forces Group with the Kurds likely saved the lives of many US and coalition forces during and after the invasion. 6   As described by Mike Tucker and Charles Faddis in their book entitled, "Operation Hotel California: The Clandestine War Inside Iraq", four of these CIA officers were awarded the Intelligence Star for their heroic actions. 2  3 
January 29: US President George W. Bush placed Iraq on the axis of evil, along with Iran and North Korea, for developing weapons of mass destruction, violating human rights, and enmity with the United States.
