
Verrucophorus philippensis
The Philippine warty pig  is one of four known species in the pig genus  endemic to the Philippines. The other three endemic species are the Visayan warty pig , Mindoro warty pig  and the Palawan bearded pig , also being rare members of the family Suidae. Philippine warty pigs have two pairs of warts, with a tuft of hair extending outwards from the warts closest to the jaw. It has multiple native common names, but it is most widely known as baboy damo  in Tagalog.
There are at least two recognized subspecies of the Philippine warty pig:
In general, the original distribution of S. philippensis covered the western islands of the Philippines, while the original distribution of S. cebifrons covered the central and eastern islands. Specifically, the range of Philippine warty pigs included Luzon, Biliran, Samar, Leyte, Mindoro, Mindanao, Jolo, Polillo, Catanduanes, and possibly other islands. The warty pigs in Lubang Island and its outlying islands may be a distinct species. Moreover, it was formerly found in most habitats  but is now confined to remote forests due to loss of habitat and heavy hunting by noose traps or trigger set bullets.
Wild pigs have been reported in Bohol and Sibuyan, although it is unclear whether these populations are S. cebifrons or S. philippensis. In April 2022, a Philippine warty pig was documented by a Department of Environment and Natural Resources  team while climbing Mount Apo. 2 
It is closely related to the Bornean bearded pig , and in fact was once thought to be a subspecies  like the Palawan bearded pig . The Palawan bearded pig is now also frequently classified not as a subspecies, but as a separate Philippine endemic pig species, S. ahoenobarbus.
With loss of its natural habitat from deforestation and uncontrolled logging and hunting, they have been forced into close contact with domestic pigs  , and hybridization between the two species has been reported. Accordingly, genetic contamination of Philippine warty pig stock is a real and irreversible problem. 1  3  4 
