The Return of the Man from U.N.C.L.E.: The Fifteen Years Later Affair is a 1983 American made-for-television action-adventure film based on the 1964–1968 television series The Man from U.N.C.L.E. starring Robert Vaughn and David McCallum reprising the roles they had originated on that program. Several of the crew from the series also worked on the film, which was produced by Viacom rather than Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer and/or Turner Entertainment. Leo G. Carroll had died in 1972, so Patrick Macnee was recruited to appear as an entirely different character, Sir John Raleigh, who had presumably taken over as Number 1 of Section I, the Director of U.N.C.L.E., after Alexander Waverly had died, and Carroll's photograph was displayed prominently in many scenes that featured Macnee's Sir John.
The criminal international organization T.H.R.U.S.H. steals the bomb H957 and demands $350 million, to be delivered within 72 hours by their former adversary, Napoleon Solo. This forces U.N.C.L.E., the United Network Command for Law and Enforcement, to reactivate the two top agents of its Section II, Solo and Illya Kuryakin, both of whom had left its ranks 15 years before and are now pursuing other lines of civilian work—Kuryakin as a fashion designer whose resignation was acrimonious and precipitated by a professional disaster, Solo as a marketer of computers and independent businessman.
Equipped in their original fashion, Solo and Kuryakin search for the bomb and attempt to close down permanently what proves to be a splinter T.H.R.U.S.H. group; the original organization had fragmented in 1968 after its failure in "The Seven Wonders of the World Affair" and has yet to regain the power to threaten worldwide law and order that it had possessed up to that time.
George Lazenby's cameo appearance as 'J.B.' – driving an Aston Martin and complete with an On Her Majesty's Secret Service name check – made 1983 the year of three Bonds, with the 'battle' at the box office between Roger Moore's sixth outing  and Sean Connery's return to the role after 12 years .
Producer  and writer Michael Sloan, a longtime fan of The Man from U.N.C.L.E., based his script on a treatment he had written at age 19 durring the series' original run. 3  MGM who owns the rights had been interested in a theatrical version of the series until Sloan introduced the idea of a television film which resulted in MGM passing the project to their television division. 3  MGM eventually lost interest in the project after a year of negotiations with CBS, but Sloan took the project to Viacom who purchased temporary rights to the series and made the deal with CBS wherein all rights would revert back to MGM following telecast and theatrical engagements in Europe. 3  Robert Short served as technical advisor on the film and like Sloan was also a fan of the original series and even provided a reel of footage from the original series for director Ray Austin to showcase the tone, balance, and structure of the series. 3  Short had also acquired many props from the original series at an MGM auction 10 years prior and incorporated many of them in the movie. 3 
