Abomey is the capital of the Zou Department of Benin. The commune of Abomey covers an area of 142 square kilometres and, as of 2012, had a population of 90,195 people. 1  2 
Abomey houses the Royal Palaces of Abomey, a collection of small traditional houses that were inhabited by the Kings of Dahomey from 1600 to 1900, and which were designated a World Heritage Site by UNESCO in 1985. 3 
Abomey was founded in the 17th century as the capital of the Kingdom of Dahomey , on the site of the former village of Kana. 3  Traditional legends state that the town was founded by Do-Aklin, a son of the king of Allada who ventured north to found his own kingdom; the name is thought to come from Danhomé, also spelled Danxomé, meaning "belly of Dan", Dan being the original chief of the village. 3  
Dahomey expanded rapidly in the 1700s, absorbing many of the surrounding kingdoms, and growing rich from the slave trade. 3  After several attempts, the French conquered the kingdom on 16 November 1892, prompting King Béhanzin to torch the city and flee northward. 3  4  Thereafter the town declined in importance, a process hastened when the French built the new administrative centre of Bohicon immediately to the east. 3  Today, the city is of less importance, but is still popular with tourists and as a centre for crafts.
The Royal Palaces of Abomey are a group of earthen structures built by the Fon people between the mid-17th and late 19th Centuries. One of the most famous and historically significant traditional sites in West Africa, the palaces form a UNESCO World Heritage Sites. 3 
The town was surrounded by a mud wall with a circumference estimated at 10 kilometres , pierced by six gates, and protected by a ditch five feet deep, filled with a dense growth of prickly acacia, the usual defence of West African strongholds. Within the walls were villages separated by fields, several royal palaces, a market-place and a large square containing the barracks. Only 10 of the original 12 palace survived the 1892 burning by Béhanzin, Dahomey's last king. 3  The French colonial administration rebuilt the town and connected it with the coast by a railroad.
When UNESCO designated the royal palaces of Abomey as a World Heritage Site in 1985 it stated:
From 1993, 50 of the 56 bas-reliefs that formerly decorated the walls of King Glèlè  have been located and replaced on the rebuilt structure. The bas-reliefs carry an iconographic program expressing the history and power of the Fon people.
As reported by UNESCO, on 21 January 2009 the Royal Palaces of Abomey suffered from a fire "which destroyed several buildings." 5  The fire was the most recent disaster to have plagued the site, coming after a powerful tornado damaged the site in 1984. 6 
"Important witchdoctors" 
Dance of the Fon chiefs 1908
Young girl with wooden statue of mystic chair 
Town Hall, located in the former Governor's Palace
One of the royal palaces.
