Remchingen ) is a municipality in the Enz district, in Baden-Württemberg, Germany, situated on the river Pfinz, 14 km southeast of Karlsruhe, and 12 km northwest of Pforzheim.
The municipality of Remchingen was formed on January 1, 1973, through the merger of the two municipalities of Singen and Wilferdingen. The name of the former lords of "Remchingen" is chosen as the place name of the new community.
On January 1, 1975, the community of Nöttingen was incorporated into Remchingen.
No local councils have been set up, the districts are represented in different degrees in the local council.
Description: Two silver crossed glaive poles in red covered with a silver shield, inside a green-tipped red rose with blue clusters.
Before Remchingen came into being, there were the communities of Wilferdingen, Singen and Darmsbach, all of which had their own coat of arms. The coat of arms of Wilferdingen was then adopted.Wilferdingen
Singen
Nöttingen
Remchingen consists of the former municipalities Nöttingen, Wilferdingen and Singen. Remchingen was originally formed on 1 January 1973 by the merging of the municipalities Wilferdingen and Singen with Nöttingen also being included on 1 January 1975.
Neighbouring municipalities are Pfinztal, Königsbach-Stein, Kämpfelbach, Keltern and Karlsbad.
Remchingen has a relatively mild climate. This is characterized by the Pfinztal and the Rhine valley.
Source: climate-data.org 2 
Remchingen has sister city agreements with the following cities:
Approximately 300 Sanbiagesi along with their families now live in Remchingen as well as another 100 former residents of Remchingen can be found in San Biagio Platani having returned to their hometown. 3 
Remchingen is made up of four districts. The four districts are very dense and central. The largest district is Wilferdingen. It is centrally located in the middle of Remchingen. This is where most of the infrastructure and the town center can be found. Singen is on the northern side in the direction of Karlsruhe. Singen is the second largest district and is right next to Wilferdingen. Nöttingen is the third largest and southernmost district. Darmsbach, by far the smallest district of Remchingen, lies between Nöttingen and Wilferdingen. All four districts are very close to each other and can be reached very quickly.
The four districts are Wilferdingen, Singen, Nöttingen and Darmsbach.
Wilferdingen is the largest district in the municipality of Remchingen.
Wilferdingen used to be inhabited by Romans. An old Roman house was excavated on the Niemandsberg in Wilferdingen. Wilferdingen was an independent municipality until 1973. On January 1, 1973, Wilferdingen joined forces with Singen to form the Remchingen community.
Wilferdingen is in the center of Remchingen. It is central and is separated from Singen and Darmsbach. Darmsbach delimits the district on the southwestern tip. The northern border of Wilferdingen converges at the border of Singen. The river Pfinz, which is a tributary of the Rhine, runs through Wilferdingen.
The federal highway 10 runs through Wilferdingen and continues to Karlsruhe and Pforzheim. There are also bus stops in Wilferdingen. The Karlsruhe-Mühlacker railway runs on the border between Wilferdingen and Singen. There is the Wilferdingen-Singen train station in Wilferdingen. The station also connects Wilferdingen and Singen with the help of an underpass. From the train station you can get to Karlsruhe, Pforzheim and Stuttgart, among others. Light rail vehicles, the Interregio-Express and the Regional-Express stop here. There is also a small airfield in Wilferdingen.
There are several sports facilities in Wilferdingen. There are several sports grounds, sports halls and athletics fields. Wilferdingen has, among other things, a football club, an athletics club and many more. There is a wide range of sports on offer in Wilferdingen, from hockey to boules.
Remchingen's central infrastructure is in Wilferdingen. So you can find the new Remchingen city center there. In the city center there are cultural offers such as the Remchingen cultural hall, the new town hall, a brewery and much more. You can also find the shopping street in Remchingen there. There are many shops along the B10. There are also many supermarkets, a hardware store, gas stations and also a primary and secondary school. Wilferdingen is the Remching district that has the best infrastructure. There are also some industrial parks, a police station, a fire station and a stationed ambulance in Wilferdingen. There are many restaurants and fast food outlets. There are many retail and specialty stores.
Singen is the second largest district in the municipality of Remchingen.
Singen is the northernmost district of Remchingen, its settlement area lies predominantly on the right side of the Pfinz, which runs north-north-west there and which flows into the Kämpfelbach in the local area from the east. There is a weir and a watermill on the river. The district extends far to the south-west over the Pfinz and includes the large Buchwald forest and further north-north-east into the Hegenach forest.
Singen borders in the south on the settlement area of Wilferdingen, which is mostly on the other side of the Pfinztalbahn, which runs from the Kämpfelbachtal into the lower Pfinztal. The federal road 10 on the left Pfinzufer connects Singen with Pforzheim in the southeast and Karlsruhe in the northwest. The place is on the Bertha Benz Memorial Route.
Singen borders on the communities Pfinztal in the northwest, Königsbach-Stein in the east, Nöttingen and Karlsbad in the southwest.
Singen merged with Wilferdingen on January 1, 1973, to form the community of Remchingen. On this day, the Enzkreis was also created in its current form.
There is a train station in Singen, which forms the border with Wilferdingen. The Wilferdingen-Singen train station connects Singen with Wilferdingen via an underpass. From the train station you can reach Karlsruhe, Pforzheim and Stuttgart, among others. Light rail vehicles, the Interregio-Express and the Regional-Express stop here.
In Singen there is a Werkrealschule, a primary school and a grammar school. There are also supermarkets and many retail stores. Wilferdingen, which has a significantly better infrastructure, can be reached quickly from Singen via two bridges and two underpasses.
In Singen there is a soccer field, several sports halls, an indoor swimming pool, a tennis court and other sports grounds. There are gymnastics clubs that offer many sports such as gymnastics or Zumba in Singen, so overall a wide range of sports.
Nöttingen is a district of the southwest German municipality of Remchingenexactly between Pforzheim and Karlsruhe, which is why the place was an important transit point in history. The Church of St. Martin bears witness to this. Until the community reform, which came into force on January 1, 1975, Nöttingen was an independent community together with the smallest district of Darmsbach and the Dietenhäuser Mühle houses. Today 2500 people live in the place.
The local football club FC Nöttingen played in the then third-rate Regional League South in the 2004/05 season, after several years in the Baden-Württemberg Oberliga, Nöttingen returned to the Regional League, now the fourth division in the German league system, in the 2014/15 season, rose but immediately off again. In 2016/17 they entered the regional league again, followed by relegation. The venue is the Kleiner Arena.
The trampoline department of the Turnverein Nöttingen competes in the trampoline Bundesliga, the gymnastics department forms a gymnastics community with TB Wilferdingen in the Oberliga Baden-Württemberg.
Darmsbach is the smallest district in the municipality of Remchingen.
Darmsbach is mentioned in 1278 as a settlement that only developed in the High Middle Ages. Darmsbach was part of the municipality of Nöttingen together with Nöttingen. Darmsbach is incorporated into Remchingen on January 1, 1975, with the municipality of Nöttingen.
Darmsbach is located directly between Wilferdingen and Nöttingen on the federal motorway 8. It is the most south-westerly point of Remchingen. Darmsbach is also on the border of the municipality of Karlsbad in the district of Karlsruhe.
Darmsbach has a town center, a day-care center and several playgrounds, football fields, etc. Due to its location, the town is well connected to Wilferdingen with bike paths, walking paths, field lanes, roads and buses. Wilferdingen, which offers the central infrastructure of Remchingen, can be reached within two minutes.
Darmsbach has had a football club, FC Baden Darmsbach, since the 2010s.
The municipal council consists of 22 elected honorary councilors and the mayor as chairman. The mayor is entitled to vote in the municipal council.
The local elections was on May 29, 2019. 4 
The turnout in 2019 was 63.4% .
The results of the 2021 Baden-Württemberg state election in Remchingen. 5 
In November 2009, Luca Wilhelm Prayon was elected the new mayor with 68.7 percent of the valid votes in the first ballot; he was re-elected in 2017 with 96% and a 34% turnout. 6  In 2023, Julia Wieland won the election with 69.9 percent of all votes. 7 
In Remchingen there are local groups of several parties:
Remchingen is situated on the Karlsruhe-Mühlacker railway. The Wilferdingen-Singen station is the railway station in Remchingen. The Karlsruhe Stadtbahn drives to the station with the lines S5 and S51. It connects the station with Karlsruhe and Pforzheim. The trains come every 30 minutes. In addition, the IRE1 line stops in Remchingen every two hours. The regional train RB17a stops twice in the morning. It connects Remchingen with Karlsruhe, Heidelberg and Stuttgart.
There are 22 bus stops in Remchingen. The central point is the bus station at the train station. Lines 722 and 721 connect Remchingen with Pforzheim.
The Bundesstraße 10 and the Bundesautobahn 8 link the municipality to the national road network.
In Remchingen you can find a Realschule  in Wilferdingen. Further more there is a Gymnasium and an elementary school and a Hauptschule with Werkrealschule in Singen. There are other elementary schools in Wilferdingen and Nöttingen.
Remchingen is located on Bertha Benz Memorial Route which leads from Mannheim to Pforzheim.
Johann Gottfried Tulla, who got known for straightening the river Rhine, grew up in Nöttingen.
The Roman Museum Remchingen  is in Remchingen-Wilferdingen. There is an old Roman house and many finds from Remchingen to see.
The telephone booth museum  is on the railroad tracks. There are many telephones and telephone booths there.
Discoveries of remains from the Roman Empire were made in and around the church of Nöttingen, which can partly be seen in the church and in a museum in Karlsruhe.
In the development area "Niemandsberg" in Wilferdingen an archeological excavation of a Roman farm can be found, which was turned into a museum.
The Martinskirche in Nöttingen was first mentioned in a document in 1170. The church tower is built on the remains of a Roman watchtower, an indication that Nöttingen was already settled in Roman times. The St. Martin's patronage points to the preferred Frankish saint in the period from 7th to 9th centuries. Century . As here, the Martinskirchen were mostly built on the site of Gallo-Roman sanctuaries or on the foundations of secular buildings. In 1609 the church was redesigned and enlarged and in 1785 it was expanded again. When the church was repaired in 1936, the choir in particular was renovated and redesigned. The corner cubes that are now exposed again and the contrasting color of the window frames, like the sundial, were restored in 2006 based on the historical model. The Nöttinger Church is the oldest church in the area.
There are seven other churches in Remchingen.
The football club FC Nöttingen played in the Fußball-Regionalliga in 2004, which was the third highest football league in Germany at that time. Currently they are playing in the Fußball-Oberliga Baden-Württemberg. The venue of the FC Nöttingen is the Kleiner Arena.
Other clubs in Remchingen are FC Germania Singen and FC Alemannia Wilferdingen.
The women's basketball department of FC Nöttingen plays under the name Rutronik Stars Keltern, formerly Grüner Stern Keltern, in the highest women's basketball league in Germany. The team is also playing in the EuroLeague Women. They have winned the national championship. 9 
The motorsport racing team Rutronik Racing is based in Remchingen.
The Folk-Punk-Band Across the Border is from Remchingen.
The musician Max Giesinger is from Remchingen too.
