
Abante  is a daily Filipino tabloid publication in the Philippines. Its office is in Makati and it is owned by Prage Management Corporation, a media company owned by two veteran journalists who took over the management and operations of Abante and its sister tabloid, Abante Tonite from the Monica Publishing Corporation of the Macasaet family in October 2017. 1  Aside from Abante, Abante Tonite and NewsKo, the newspaper also operates Abante: TNT , a real-time online news website and its sister websites Bilyonaryo, Politiko, Fastbreak and Abogado, Radyo Tabloidista online radio, Teletabloidista, and Celebrity Radar, an entertainment magazine.
Abante, founded in 1987, was first published by the Banahaw Publishing Corporation, owned by national artist Virgilio Almario. The tabloid was bought in 1988 by Amado Macasaet, chairman of Monica Publishing Corporation , whose son, Allen, became the company's president. 2  3  At that time, MPC was already publishing a weekly magazine for students. 3 
Abante is published every morning. 4  In 1989, MPC began publishing Abante Tonite, its afternoon edition, with the elder Macasaet as its founder. 2  3  4 
Abante has been targeting readers, mostly of low-income class. Upon its success in circulation, it later reduced its most dubious content to reach more advertisers and readers, a strategy later adopted by other tabloids. 5 
Its online platform was launched in 2006. 2 
Reportedly, Abante had won most of at least 50 libel cases, few were settled out-of-court. 2 
During the State of Emergency in 2006, operatives from the Criminal Investigation and Detection Group tried to raid Abante's office but withdrew when they saw that there were television crew in the area. 6 
On September 9, 2019, four armed men burned the Abante Tonite printing house in Parañaque City. It was the first violent attack on the newspaper since its inception in 1987. The incident was condemned by the National Union of Journalists of the Philippines. 7 
On October 10, 2022, Abante launched is online morning newscast called Abante Teletabloid and public service show I-Abante Mo! both shown on the tabloid's social media accounts. 8 
