
Dennis Magloyuan Regino , b  known professionally as April Boy Regino , was a Filipino singer, songwriter, comedian and actor who popularized ballads such as "Paano ang Puso ko", "Umiiyak ang Puso ko't Sumisigaw" and "Di ko Kayang Tanggapin" in the 1990s and novelty songs such as "Ye Ye Vonnel". He always wore a baseball cap in public as a trademark.
Dennis Magloyuan Regino was born on April 9, 1961, in Marikina. 2  4  He was the fourth of Tomas and Lucena's eight children, and grew up in a slum near the railway track in Caloocan. 5  6 
As a child, he helped his parents sell snacks , and customers would often ask him to sing. At age 10, he began joining amateur singing contests for the prize money. 6  He left school after sixth grade to focus on singing, and aside from contests, he also performed in local fiestas and as an opening act for other musicians. At age 18, he became a singer in Japan. 5  6 
Regino returned to the Philippines in 1993, and together with his brothers Vingo and Jimmy, formed the musical group April Boys. Their debut song, "Sana'y Laging Magkapiling", became widely popular. 5  However, in 1995, Regino left the group to pursue a solo career. In a 2015 interview with Jessica Soho, he explained that the brothers competed among themselves which led to sulking, but they later reconciled. 6  7 
His first solo album, Umiiyak ang Puso, was released in 1995 under Ivory Music and sold 120,000 units . The song of the same name won Best Country-Ballad Recording in that year's Awit Awards. 7 
He migrated to the United States and was based there as an entertainer to the Filipino-American community. citation needed  More recently, he was a contract recording artist with Viva Records. citation needed 
He also did a Tagalog and English cover version of the song いとしのエリー, renaming it "Honey My Love So Sweet". citation needed 
In 2015 after a year off, Regino returned to music with his brand new album and a new music company, GMA Music. 8 
Regino was married to Madelyn Regino. The couple had a son named JC and daughter named Charm. 9  10  JC Regino followed his father's footsteps as a singer and composer. 11 
Regino took his oath as a United States citizen in March 2011. 2 
In 2009, Regino was diagnosed with prostate cancer while living in the United States. In 2013, he announced that he was already cancer-free after years of battling the illness. In 2015, the singer shared that he had diabetic retinopathy, which is an eye condition that can cause vision loss and blindness in people with diabetes. 12  13  
At 1:00 a.m. of November 29, 2020, Regino was admitted to the Metro Antipolo Hospital and Medical Center in Antipolo. He was diagnosed with chronic kidney disease and acute respiratory failure. He was scheduled to undergo dialysis however it was not taking place during that time. Regino died at 3:00 a.m., at the age of 59. He was survived by his widow, Madelyn Regino, and two children, JC and Charmaine. 14  On December 6, Regino was entombed in his mausoleum at Valley of Sympathy Memorial Park, Antipolo, Rizal. 15 
