The Lycée International de Saint-Germain-en-Laye  is a French public school located in Saint-Germain-en-Laye, Yvelines, in the western suburbs of Paris, France. Established in 1952 as a school for the children of international personnel working at Supreme Headquarters Allied Powers Europe  in nearby Rocquencourt, the Lycée International caters to students with international and multilingual backgrounds. 1  2  With a typical success rate of 99.9 to 100 percent on the French baccalauréat, the Lycée International consistently ranks among France's top schools and is considered to be the country's best public international school. 3  4  5 
Students at the Lycée International must be fluent in one of the languages taught in one of the school's fourteen national sections: American or British English, Chinese, Danish, Dutch, German, Italian, Japanese, Norwegian, Polish, Portuguese, Russian, Spanish, and Swedish. However, they are not required to be fluent in French to be admitted, as there is a special one-year Français Spécial language program. 6  The academic curriculum of the international sections supplements the standard French curriculum with additional courses in literature/language and history/geography, taught in the language of the students' respective national sections, allowing them to pursue the option internationale du baccalauréat , the international variant of the French baccalauréat.
The school's main campus at 2 bis rue du Fer à Cheval  in Saint-Germain-en-Laye contains a preschool , a primary school , a middle school , and an upper school . Due to the size of the student body, some larger national sections have satellite campuses for primary and middle school grades at other local schools in the area of Saint-Germain-en-Laye. 7  All students return to the main campus for their final three  years.
The history of the school to date can be described by three distinct phases:
In 1951, the then-recently established NATO , a grouping of 15 countries, created Supreme Headquarters Allied Powers Europe  with the aim of ensuring peace and security in the North Atlantic region, and promising European members the support of the United States in the event of any future aggression.
SHAPE was installed at Rocquencourt, and Saint Germain-en-Laye was chosen as the place of residence for the serving officers and their families. The SHAPE Village Project was built in the grounds of the Chateau d'Hennemont to accommodate 1,500 officers and soldiers from 13 nationalities, and their families. SHAPE Supreme Commander General Dwight D. Eisenhower decided to create a school for the children of the officers, which he hoped would help SHAPE's multi-national families to live and work together in harmony.
The SHAPE village school opened in January 1952, under the direction of René Tallard. By the end of the school year, 400 children were on the register, including 200 French children, half of them inhabitants of the town. Two years later, in 1954, the school was officially renamed the NATO International School .
Funding from SHAPE provided the school with equipment and accommodation, including a new flagship building completed in 1960. From 1961, senior students prepared for the Diplôme des Ecoles Internationales and the following year, the school was renamed the NATO International Lycée . The founding proviseur, René Tallard, retired in 1965.
Not only did 1965 mark the retirement of the much respected René Tallard, it was also the year in which President de Gaulle decided to pull France out of NATO’s military operations. NATO, and SHAPE, were forced to find a new European base, in Belgium, and the Lycée International de l’OTAN lost two thirds of its pupils at a stroke. It was an immediate challenge for the new proviseur, Edgar Scherer. His was the delicate task of working with the remaining two public sections – the German and the Dutch – to persuade the educational authorities, both in France and overseas, to rebuild the life of the school which, would from now on need to count on the support of "economic expatriates" to replace those of the original military community.
By 1968, under Scherer’s leadership and direction, the school was building up strength with six sections – German, Dutch, British, American, Danish and Italian.
Scherer’s successor, Jean-Pierre Maillard, had a different challenge: modernising the infrastructure of a school, which had been expanding again over more than twenty years. Replacing pre-fabricated buildings with more lasting structures was now a priority.
Thanks to state funding, the result was a new campus, including a fine new primary building. Under Maillard, other projects advanced too: the development of the network of partner schools, the drafting of a "projet d’établissement", the creation of the Japanese section in 1993; the embracing of the Option Internationale du Baccalauréat as the final exam for senior Lycée students, and the renovation of the chateau.
In 1997, Maillard handed the baton on to Patrick Charpeil, who focused attention on the administrative complexities of the school, clarifying the legal basis of the Lycée and its component parts. Charpeil continued to oversee the restoration of the chateau and successfully liaised and lobbied with the supervising educational authorities to advance important projects concerning security, major improvements and maintenance.
Yves Lemaire took over the helm in September 2001 until September 2012. The challenges were as stimulating as ever: the final stages of renovation and the future use of the chateau; the pressure for increasing the number of classes at Lycée level; nationwide administration of the OIB; the creation of the Polish section at Collège and Lycée level  and the consolidation of the legal status of the school via a new decree.
His successor, Joel Bianco officially took office as the new proviseur in September 2012. He directed the lycée from 2012 to 2016, integrating the Chinese Section. Isabelle Negral was proviseur from 2016 to 2019. She oversaw a major renovation, which included the creation of new secondary buildings, a new preschool building, and a gymnasium, as well as the renovation of the Agora, which will host the CDI, the Maison des Lycéens, meeting rooms, and a center for the arts. France Bessis became proviseur of the school in 2019. citation needed 
The curriculum at the Lycée International combines the French national curriculum with the curriculum of one of the national sections. French Education National teachers teach subjects to French national standards and the school's foreign teachers – employed in one of the system’s fourteen national sections – are given the freedom and responsibility to teach literature, language and history to their own national standards. These additional classes in the national sections provide :
Since the French curriculum requires learning at least two foreign language, many students who graduate from the Lycée International are fluent in four languages.
Students who do not speak French are placed in a French immersion program called Français Spécial. After one year, they are expected to be fluent in French and integrate the standard French curriculum along with the rest of the student population.
Lycée International students must take the international variation on the baccalauréat, called the OIB , in order to take advantage of their language skills. Baccalaureat results at the Lycée International de Saint Germain-en-Laye fluctuate between 99% and 100%, and an honors  rate which is above 90%. These figures are used to compile rankings by national news outlets. While each news outlet has its own ranking system, in all the Lycée International consistently figures among the top ten in France.
Every year many Lycée International students present the prestigious Concours Général. It is ranked 4th in the country for the cumulative number of winners. 
The school has fourteen national sections which are essentially run as schools within the school. Students are taught the relevant national curriculum alongside the standard French curriculum. Foreign teachers in each of the national sections give the students lessons in literature, geography and history  in their native tongue. All other disciplines of the official program are taught in French, by French Ministry of Education teachers.
Parent associations organize numerous events which bring together the school's fourteen international sections:
In addition, each section celebrates numerous events linked to their own culture and history, such as the Scandinavian sections' festival of lights, the Japanese spring celebration, and the American Section's potluck dinner and bingo night. Most sections also have specific theater programs and other extra-curricular activities for students.
The foyer socio-éducatif  organizes student concerts  and theater performances.
Although tuition fees vary by section as some are private and others public, one of  the most expensive ones is the American section. In addition to registration and application fees that are around 1 200 euros per child, families are required to pay annual tuition going from 4 290 euros for grades going from pre-K to middle school to 5 670 euros for high school. These prices go up if companies are paying for tuition, but also go down if there are multiple children enrolled in the section.
Façade of the Château d'Hennemont
Chapel
Canteen
The "Agora"
