
"Hen Wlad Fy Nhadau"  is the unofficial national anthem of Wales. 1  The title, taken from the first words of the song, means "Old Land of My Fathers" in Welsh, usually rendered in English as simply "Land of My Fathers". The words were written by Evan James and the tune composed by his son, James James, both residents of Pontypridd, Glamorgan, in January 1856. 1  2  The earliest written copy survives and is part of the collections of the National Library of Wales. 2 
"Glan Rhondda" , as it was known when it was composed, was first performed in the vestry of the original Capel Tabor, Maesteg , in either January or February 1856, by Elizabeth John from Pontypridd, and it soon became popular in the locality. 2 
James James, the composer, was a harpist who played his instrument in the public house which he ran, for the purpose of dancing. 2  The song was originally intended to be performed in 6/8 time but had to be slowed down to its present tempo clarification needed  when it began to be sung by large crowds.
The popularity of the song increased after the Llangollen festival of 1858. Thomas Llewelyn of Aberdare won a competition for an unpublished collection of Welsh airs with a collection that included "Glan Rhondda". The adjudicator of the competition, "Owain Alaw"  asked for permission to include "Glan Rhondda" in his publication, Gems of Welsh melody . This volume gave "Glan Rhondda" its more famous title, "Hen Wlad Fy Nhadau", and was sold in large quantities and ensured the popularity of the anthem across the whole of Wales. 2 
At the Bangor Eisteddfod of 1874 "Hen Wlad Fy Nhadau" gained further popularity when it was sung by Robert Rees , one of the leading Welsh soloists of his day. 3  It was increasingly sung at patriotic gatherings and gradually it developed into a national anthem. 2 
"Hen Wlad Fy Nhadau" was also one of the first Welsh-language songs recorded, when Madge Breese sang it on 11 March 1899, for the Gramophone Company, as part of the first recording in the Welsh language. 2  4 
"Hen Wlad Fy Nhadau" was the first national anthem to be sung at the start of a sporting event. 5  6  In 1905, the Welsh national rugby team hosted New Zealand's first touring team, who started every match performing a haka. As a response, Wales player Teddy Morgan led the crowd singing the anthem. 7  Although crowds often sang anthems during games, there was no precedent for an anthem to be sung before a match. n 1 
In 1978 for their Hen Wlad Fy Nhadau album, Geraint Jarman a'r Cynganeddwyr recorded a version of the anthem using electric guitars, inspired by Jimi Hendrix's rendition of "The Star-Spangled Banner" . Jarman's version, played by Welsh guitarist Tich Gwilym, is one of the most famous modern versions of the song. 6 
Tradition has established "Hen Wlad Fy Nhadau" as an unofficial Welsh anthem 1  since 1905, when it was first sung by fans at rugby games, although the official anthem at the time was "God Bless the Prince of Wales". "Hen Wlad Fy Nhadau" slowly established itself as the more popular anthem over the next four decades and was sung along with "God Bless the Prince of Wales" and "God Save the Queen" before sporting events until 1975, when sports officials decided that "Hen Wlad Fy Nhadau" should be sung alone. Like other British anthems, it has not been established as a national anthem by law, but it has been used as a national anthem at official governmental ceremonies, including the opening of the Welsh Parliament / Senedd Cymru , and at receptions of the British monarchy since the 1970s. 2  6  Petitions to make the song an official national anthem for Wales are occasionally submitted to the Senedd, but the last time one raised sufficient signatures to be debated, in 2014, the conclusion was that this is 'not currently a possible development'. 9  It is recognised and used as an anthem at both national and local events in Wales.
"Imagine some 40,000 people singing their national anthem with all the fervour of which the Celtic heart is capable. It was the most impressive incident I have ever witnessed on a football field. It gave a semi-religious solemnity to this memorable contest, intensely thrilling, even awe-inspiring. It was a wonderful revelation of the serious spirit in which the Welsh take their football."
All Black captain Dave Gallaher's remark on experiencing the Welsh singing their anthem for the first time. 10 
Usually, "Hen Wlad Fy Nhadau" will be the only anthem sung: only the first stanza and chorus are usually sung . "God Save the King", the national anthem of the United Kingdom, is sometimes played alongside "Hen Wlad Fy Nhadau" during official events with a royal connection. 6 
The existence of a separate national anthem for Wales has not always been apparent to those from outside the country. In 1993, the newly appointed Secretary of State for Wales, John Redwood, was embarrassingly videotaped opening and closing his mouth during a communal singing of the national anthem, clearly ignorant of the words but unable to mime convincingly; 11  the pictures were frequently cited as evidence of his unsuitability for the post. According to John Major's autobiography, the first thing Redwood's successor William Hague said, on being appointed, was that he had better find someone to teach him the words. He found Ffion Jenkins, and later married her. 6 
"Hen Wlad Fy Nhadau" has been adapted to the anthems of Cornwall , Brittany , 11  and Y Wladfa . These adaptions share the same tune as "Hen Wlad Fy Nhadau" and have similar lyrics.
I
Mae hen wlad fy nhadau yn annwyl i mi,
Gwlad beirdd a chantorion, enwogion o fri;
Ei gwrol ryfelwyr, gwladgarwyr tra m칙d,
Tros ryddid gollasant eu gwaed. b 
Cytgan:
Gwlad! Gwlad! Pleidiol wyf i'm gwlad.
Tra m칪r yn fur i'r bur hoff bau,
O bydded i'r hen iaith barhau. c 
II
Hen Gymru fynyddig, paradwys y bardd,
Pob dyffryn, pob clogwyn, i'm golwg sydd hardd;
Trwy deimlad gwladgarol, mor swynol yw si
Ei nentydd, afonydd, i fi. d 
.mw-parser-output .yesitalicCytgan
III
Os treisiodd y gelyn fy ngwlad tan ei droed, e 
Mae hen iaith y Cymry mor fyw ag erioed,
Ni luddiwyd yr awen gan erchyll law brad,
Na thelyn berseiniol fy ngwlad.
洧 Cytgan 洧
1
/ma틣톧퍒 he틣n wla틣d v톛 틛n퍈a.da톧퍒 톛n 틛a.n툵i퍒l i틣 mi틣/
/토wla틣d b톝i퍒r칧 a틣 픦an틛t톖r.j톖n 톝n틛w톖토.j톖n o틣 vri틣/
/톝i퍒 틛토툵.r톖l r톛틛v톝l.w톩r 토wlad틛토ar.w톩r tra틣 ma틣d/
/tr톖s 틛r톛.칧톩d 토톖틛톫a.sant 톝i퍒 토wa틣톧퍒d/
/틛k톛t.토an/:
/토wla틣d 토wla틣d 틛pl톝i퍒d.j톖l u틣톧퍒v i틣m 토wla틣d/
/tra틣 mo틣r 톛n v톧틣r i틣r b톧틣r ho틣f ba톧퍒/
/o틣 틛b톛.칧톝d i틣r he틣n jai퍒풪 bar틛ha톧퍒/
2
/he틣n 틛토톛m.r톧 v톛틛n톛.칧톩토 pa틛ra.d툵톧퍒s 톛 bar칧/
/po틣b 틛d톛.fr톧룙 po틣b 틛kl톖토.w톩n i틣m 틛토톖.l툵토 s톧틣칧 har칧/
/tru틣톧퍒 틛d톝i퍒m.lad 토wlad틛토a.r톖l m톖r 틛s툵톧퍒.n톖l 톩u퍒 si틣/
/톝i퍒 틛n톝n.t톧뤢 a틛v톖.n톧뤢 i틣 vi틣/
/틛k톛t.토an/
 
3
/톖s 틛tr톝i퍒.툮톖칧 톛 틛토톝.l톧룙 v톛 콂wla틣d tan 톝i퍒 dro틣톧퍒d/
/ma틣톧퍒 he틣n jai퍒풪 톛 틛k톛m.r톧 m톖r v톩u퍒 a토 톝r틛jo틣톧퍒d/
/ni틣 틛l톧.d톩u퍒.톧룏 톛r 틛au퍒.톝n 토an 틛톝r.픦톧뤨 la틣u퍒 bra틣d/
/na틣 틛풪톝.l톧n b톝r틛s톝i퍒n.j톖l v톛 콂wla틣d/
 
洧 /틛k톛t.토an/ 洧
I
O Land of my fathers, O land of my love,
Dear mother of minstrels who kindle and move,
And hero on hero, who at honour's proud call,
For freedom their lifeblood let fall.
Chorus:
Country! Country! O but my heart is with you!
As long as the sea your bulwark shall be,
To Cymru my heart shall be true.
II
O land of the mountains, the bard's paradise,
Whose precipice, valleys are fair to my eyes,
Green murmuring forest, far echoing flood
Fire the fancy and quicken the blood
Chorus
III
For tho' the fierce foeman has ravaged your realm,
The old speech of Wales he cannot o'erwhelm,
Our passionate poets to silence command,
Or banish the harp from your strand.
洧 Chorus 洧
I
The land of my fathers is dear to me,
Old land where the minstrels are honoured and free;
Its warring defenders so gallant and brave,
For freedom their life's blood they gave.
Chorus:
Home, home, true I am to home,
While seas secure the land so pure,
O may the old language endure.
II
Old land of the mountains, the Eden of bards,
Each gorge and each valley a loveliness guards;
Through love of my country, charmed voices will be
Its streams, and its rivers, to me.
Chorus
III
Though foemen have trampled my land 'neath their feet,
The language of Cambria still knows no retreat;
The muse is not vanquished by traitor's fell hand,
Nor silenced the harp of my land.
洧 Chorus 洧
I
룓! Land of my fathers, the land of the free,
The home of the Telyn, so soothing to me;
Thy noble defenders were gallant and brave,
For thy freedom their hearts' life they gave!
Chorus:
Wales, Wales, my mother's sweet home is in Wales,
Till death be pass'd my love shall last,
My longing, my hiraeth for Wales.
II
Thou Eden of bards, and birthplace of song,
The sons of thy mountains are valiant and strong;
The voice of thy streamlets is soft to the ear,
Thy hills and thy vallies how dear!
Chorus
III
Though trampled and crush'd by oppression's foul wrong,
The language of Cambria still lives on in song;
The Awen survives, nor have envious tales
Yet silenced the harp of dear Wales.
洧 Chorus 洧
I
The old land of my fathers is dear to me,
Land of bards and singers, famous men of renown;
Her brave warriors, very splendid patriots,
For freedom shed their blood.
Chorus:
Country, Country, I am faithful to my Country.
While the sea  a wall to the pure, most loved land,
O may the old language  endure.
II
Old mountainous Wales, paradise of the bard,
Every valley, every cliff, to my look is beautiful.
Through patriotic feeling, so charming is the murmur
Of her brooks, rivers, to me.
Chorus
III
If the enemy oppresses my land under his foot,
The old language of the Welsh is as alive as ever.
The muse is not hindered by the hideous hand of treason,
Nor  the melodious harp of my country.
洧 Chorus 洧
The Welsh poet Dylan Thomas is often quoted as saying "The land of my fathers. My fathers can have it!" in reference to Wales. However, this is misleading, as it was a villainous character in one of Thomas' short stories that spoke this line.
Gwynfor Evans named his history of Wales Land of my fathers: 2,000 years of Welsh history. It was a translation of the Welsh original, Aros Mae.
The 춲1 coins minted in 1985, 1990, 1995 and 2000 with a Welsh emblem on the reverse, also bear the edge inscription PLEIDIOL WYF I'M GWLAD , from the refrain of "Hen Wlad Fy Nhadau". 18  The new Royal Badge of Wales adopted in 2008 features this motto.
A version of "Hen Wlad Fy Nhadau" was written by Lewis Evans, a migrant from Wales to Y Wladfa, a Welsh-speaking settlement in Patagonia, South America. The version penned by Evans is called "Gwlad Newydd y Cymry" . "Gwlad Newydd y Cymry" is played to the same tune as "Hen Wlad Fy Nhadau". 19 
The lyrics to "Gwlad Newydd y Cymry" are as follows :
I
Y mae Patagonia yn annwyl i mi,
Gwlad newydd y Cymry mwyneiddlon yw hi;
Anadlu gwir ryddid a gawn yn y wlad,
O gyrhaedd gormesiaeth a brad:
Cytgan:
Gwlad, gwlad, pleidiol wyf i'm gwlad,
Tra haul y nen uwchben ein ,
O! bydded i'r Wladfa barhau.
II
Bu'r Cymry yn gorwedd dan ddirmyg yn drwch,
Wel, diolch am Wladfa i'n codi o'r llwch;
Ein heniaith a gadwn mewn urddas a bri,
Tra'r Gamwy'n ddysgleiriol ei lli:
Cytgan
III
'Chaiff Cymro byth mwyach ymostwng i Sais,-
Terfynodd ei orthrwm - dystawyd ei lais;
Y Wladfa fawrygwn tra'r Andes wen fawr,
A'i choryn yn 'stafell y wawr:
洧 Cytgan 洧
I
Patagonia is dear to me,
The new land of the noble Welsh people;
True freedom we breathe in our new country,
Far from the reach of oppression and betrayal:
Chorus:
Nation , Nation, I am faithful to my Nation.
While the sun rises above the land,
Oh! may the Settlement continue.
II
The Welsh have been lying broken in scorn,
Well, thanks to the Wladfa from dust we're reborn;
Our language of old we laud and esteem
While Camwy flows with shining stream:
Chorus
III
Let Welshman submit to the English no more,
Their oppression is ended, and silenced their roar;
Y Wladfa we praise while the great white Andes,
With its peak in the chamber of dawn:
洧 Chorus 洧
Learn to read, pronounce, sing perform Welsh National Anthem; New App published by the National Library of Wales published. https://itunesconnect.apple.com/WebObjects/iTunesConnect.woa/ra/ng/app/908469898
