The siege of Paris of 1435-36 took place during the decisive Lancastrian phase of the Hundred Years' War. The resurgent forces of Charles VII of France, having reversed the tide of the conflict, set their sights on capturing the capital, Paris, which had been controlled by forces loyal to Henry VI of England since 1420. 
Inspired by the arrival of Joan of Arc, the French royal forces successfully lifted the siege of Orléans in 1429. Thereafter, Joan attempted to capture Paris that September, but the siege was halted by the order of Charles VII after a four-hour assault yielded no progress. 
In 1435, Charles sought to make another attempt at the capital. On 9 May 1435, his forces prevailed at the Battle of Gerberoy. Taking advantage of the disrupted English defences, on the early hours of 1 June, Armagnac troops led by the captains of nearby of Melun and Lagny seized Saint-Denis. 1  2  Paris was now blockaded, making it difficult to supply the city by river or elsewhere. 2  However, attempts to take Paris were complicated by the continuing conflict between the Armagnacs and Burgundians, the latter remaining allied with the English. 
While peace negotiations at the Congress of Arras were ongoing between the French, English and Burgundians, fighting around Saint-Denis continued. As the English representatives left the Congress, the Treaty of Arras was signed between Charles VII and Philip the Good, Duke of Burgundy on 21 September. But while the Burgundians had become reconciled to France, their forces continued to participate in the fighting at Saint-Denis. The French forces relinquished the city on 4 October, but would regain the assistance of the Burgundians for the duration of the conflict.
Having received the reinforcement of the Burgundian troops, the French army defeated the English and their reinforcements at Saint-Denis on 6 April 1436, driving them back within the Paris city walls.
Paris was now completely encircled by the French army. Unable to receive food shipments, Parisians had witnessed the price of grain quadruple in two months. 
On April 13, Richemont presented himself beneath the city walls. Charles VII had promised a total amnesty, leading to secret negotiations with the Parisian bourgeoisie. Michel de Lallier, Jean de La Fontaine et four other citizens allowed Charles's forces to enter, under the command of Arthur de Richemont et Jean de Dunois, This was achieved using a simple tactic: the bourgeois provoked a riot at the porte Saint-Denis, on the city's northern edge, obliging the English to mobilise their forces in that sector. Paris was then a city of narrow streets, lacking large boulevards that would allow for easy troop movements. This meant that troops needed to travel from one city gate to the next.    
Taking advantage of the diversion, the French royal forces promptly attacked the Porte Saint-Jacques on the city's east end, now poorly defended. Once captured, the troops easily reached Les Halles and Notre-Dame.
The English now found themselves in a street battle, in which residents launched projectiles from their windows, requiring the English to retreat to the Bastille Saint-Antoine. On 17 April, the English garrison was permitted to withdraw from the city, leaving for Rouen.
Charles VII finally entered Paris on 12 November 1437. He was taken aback by the condition of much of the city, having suffered from years of civil war and occupation. He permitted all Parisians who had fled to return, on condition that they pledge allegiance to him. 
