
Jo Jeeta Wohi Sikandar  also abbreviated as JJWS is a 1992 Indian Hindi-language coming-of-age sports film, directed and co-written by Mansoor Khan, 2  and produced and co-written by Nasir Hussain. The film stars Aamir Khan, 3  Ayesha Jhulka, Deepak Tijori, Pooja Bedi, Mamik Singh and Kulbhushan Kharbanda, whilst Aamir's brother Faisal Khan makes a special appearance. The music was by Jatin–Lalit.
Jo Jeeta Wohi Sikandar was inspired by the 1979 American film Breaking Away. 4  5  It won two Filmfare Awards, including Best Film. 6  It was remade in Telugu in 1999 as Thammudu which in turn was remade in multiple languages. 7 
In the hills of Dehradun, a marathon cycle race is the main event of an annual inter-school sports meet. Ratan Lal, of the lowly Model College, is the main contender to the defending champion, Shekhar Malhotra, of the elite Rajput School. Though Ratan races hard, Shekhar manages to beat him at the finish line to win the race. Not content with having finished second, Ratan's father, Ramlal, vows to buy him a cycle worthy of his ability, to give him a better chance at next year's race. 
Through the year, Ratan trains hard as Ramlal saves money for the cycle. Meanwhile, Ratan's younger brother, Sanjay, has no lofty ambitions. He is content living an idyllic life that involves hanging out with his friends from Model College, borrowing cars from his best friend Anjali, and, occasionally, pranking rival students from other colleges who visit his father's cafe in the town square. Shekhar, fresh from another victory at the sports meet, visits Ramlal's cafe with his friends, to pick up girls from other elite schools. His next target is Devika, a new entrant to the all-girls' school, Queen's. 
Devika agrees to meet Sehkhar at a picnic spot, but finds him romancing her classmate when she reaches there. She immediately runs away, landing a ride in Sanjay's car, who happened to be driving there. Sanjay helps Devika get back at Shekhar for cheating on her, then drives her to a lavish mansion to brag about his father's supposed wealth. Devika, who does not know Sanjay is from Model, is amazed and ends up falling for him. Sanjay is smitten too, and ends buying expensive gifts for her using his father's savings. 
At an inter-school dance competition, Sanjay shows up with the Model group leaving Devika shocked. Knowing only locals go to that school, she realizes he cannot be rich, and publicly dumps him the next day by visiting Ramlal's cafe with Shekhar. Sanjay feels humiliated, and picks a fight with Shekhar's friends. One of Shekhar's group is badly injured, and the fight breaks up. It resumes the next day, when Shekhar's group confronts Ratan on his morning training route. Ratan fights despite being outnumbered, but falls off a cliff after accidentally being pushed over by Shekhar. He survives, but falls into a coma, only to awake with severe injuries.
Ratan is dejected at being ruled out for the race, as is Ramlal, who had already bought for him an expensive cycle. Sanjay, seeing their disappointment, decides to compete in the race in place of Ratan. Aided by Anjali, he begins a dedicated training regimen, and eventually falls in love, seeing her selfless devotion to him. On the eve of the race, Sanjay learns that Shekhar was responsible for Ratan's fall, giving the race new meaning for him.
During the event, Sanjay keeps up with Shekhar who tries to break away from the main field. The two emerge close to each other in the final stadium laps, and Sanjay is able to chase Shekhar down. In a tit-for-tat reversal of the previous race, Sanjay overtakes Shekhar at the finish line, narrowly winning to give Model its first victory in decades. The college and Sanjay's family celebrate as Sanjay is crowned the new champion.
The film was directed by Mansoor Khan, and written and produced by Nasir Hussain. 9  Akshay Kumar had auditioned 10  and Milind Soman was signed for Shekhar Malhotra's role, 11  before Deepak Tijori played the role. Aditya Pancholi was selected to play the role of Ratan, but the role went to Mamik Singh, as confirmed by DNA.
The plot has similarities to the 1979 American film Breaking Away. However, Mansoor Khan stated that he only became aware of Breaking Away after the likeness was brought to his attention, some time after the release of Jo Jeeta Wohi Sikander. Both films have several similarities, including friendship, class barriers, bicycle racing, and parental relationship, but otherwise have different narratives, characters, motivations, treatment and racing rules. 12 
Though it is clearly mentioned in the introductory voice over that the movie is based in Dehradun , it is mentioned twice in the movie  that it takes place in Kodaikanal. The movie has been shot predominantly in various locations 13  in the south of India, primarily Kodaikanal. 14  Soman had completed 75% of his scenes before being replaced by Tijori. 15 
The music for the film was composed by Jatin–Lalit and the lyrics were penned by Majrooh Sultanpuri. The soundtrack, the second collaboration between Jatin and Lalit, helped to launch their careers. It was nominated for Best Music at the 1993 Filmfare Awards. "Pehla Nasha" was the fourth film song in Indian cinema , followed by "Baare Baare" from Naagarahaavu ) to be shot in complete slow motion. The technique was later used in many films and music videos. Pehla Nasha was the most popular track of the album and has become a cult song. Other popular tracks were "Humse Hai Sara Jahan", "Rooth Ke Humse" and "Arre Yaaron Mere Pyaaron". The song "Arre Yaaron Mere Pyaaron" was sung by Udit Narayan along with Vijeta Pandit. 17 
Jo Jeeta Wohi Sikandar was the third best-selling Bollywood soundtrack album of 1992, having sold 2.5 million units in India. 18 
All lyrics are written by Majrooh Sultanpuri; all music is composed by Jatin–LalitIn India, Jo Jeeta Wohi Sikandar net ₹40 million 19  20  and grossed ₹52 million , 1  equivalent to ₹927 million  adjusted for inflation. 21  The film opened to good responses, and was declared a hit at the box office. 22  Jo Jeeta Wohi Sikander was also broadcast on Disney Channel India.
In a review dated 29 May 1992, The Indian Express praised Najeeb Khan's photography, the sets and the performances of Aamir Khan, Ayesha Jhulka, and Pooja Bedi, but criticised Jatin–Lalit's music. 23 
Won
Nominated
