
Minor Mappillai  is a 1996 Indian Tamil-language comedy film directed by V. C. Guhanathan. The film stars Ajith Kumar, Ranjith, newcomer Rajkumar, Subhashri and Keerthana, while Srividya, Vadivelu and Vivek appeared in supporting roles. It was released on 28 June 1996. 1  2  The film was a remake of director's own Telugu film Paruvu Prathishta . citation needed 
Ramu  and Moses  are orphans and small-time crooks. They make a living by cheating people with the help of their sidekicks. One day, they even clashed with the drug smuggler "Challenge" Sankaralingam . Meanwhile, the college students Dilip  and Rekha  fall in love with each other. Rekha's father "Kuppathotti" Govindaswamy  is a wealthy industrialist who was a beggar in the past while Dilip's mother "Royal" Rajalakshmi  is an arrogant woman born with a silver spoon in her mouth. Later, "Kuppathotti" Govindaswamy and "Royal" Rajalakshmi compete for the Royal Recreation Club presidency and "Kuppathotti" Govindaswamy wins the election. "Royal" Rajalakshmi cannot digest the loss. One day, Moses poses as a foreigner and scams "Kuppathotti" Govindaswamy.
"Kuppathotti" Govindaswamy accepts to arrange the marriage of his daughter with Dilip so he meets "Royal" Rajalakshmi in her house and tries to convince her but "Royal" Rajalakshmi humiliates him. Rekha then challenges "Royal" Rajalakshmi: Rekha will marry her son Dilip with her consent. Thereafter, Ramu and Moses are caught by the people they have cheated. "Kuppathotti" Govindaswamy comes to their rescue and saves the two friends from the angry mob.
"Kuppathotti" Govindaswamy gives them a mission: one of them should seduce "Royal" Rajalakshmi's daughter Seetha . Ramu becomes "Royal" Rajalakshmi's car driver. Ramu and Seetha eventually fall in love with each other. The lovers secretly marry with the support of Dilip. "Royal" Rajalakshmi disowns her daughter and humiliates Ramu. Ramu decides to make an honest living so Moses gifts him a taxi and Ramu becomes a taxi driver. Later, Seetha becomes pregnant.
One day, Ramu witnesses the murder of a reporter by "Challenge" Sankaralingam's henchmen and Ramu escapes from them. Later that day, Ramu takes his pregnant wife with him to the hospital and the henchmen attack him. At the hospital, Ramu is in a serious condition while Seetha is about to give birth. "Challenge" Sankaralingam and his henchmen decide to kill Ramu in the hospital but Moses comes to his rescue and saves him. Ramu is back to his feet and Seetha gives birth. "Royal" Rajalakshmi eventually puts her ego aside: she now supports her son's love and accepts Ramu as her son-in-law.
The film developed in production under the title Minor Moses. 3 
The music was composed by Isaivanan. 4  5 
D. S. Ramanujam of The Hindu wrote, "The main theme of Victory Movies' Minor Maapillai has figured in  many  earlier  Tamil  movies  and  veteran  director  V.   C. Guhanathan being aware of it concentrates on humorous aspects  of the drama where Vadivelu and Vivek have a field day". 6 
