Erythema gyratum repens is a skin condition that has a strong association with internal cancers. 1  It characteristically presents with red wavy lines, generally in older adults. 1  These regular whirly rings rapidly and repetitively appear within existing ones, giving the impression that the rash is moving. 3  The resulting pattern is similar to wood grain. 1  There is often an intense itch and scale over the leading edge, which may be slightly raised. 2  
The cause is believed to have an immunological base. 4  80% of cases have an underlying cancer, of which almost half have lung cancer. 1  Sometimes no cause is found. 3  
Diagnosis is generally by its appearance, although tests may be required to exclude other conditions. 3  These tests may include blood tests. 1  A cancer may be located using medical imaging. 1  Necrolytic migratory erythema and erythema migrans are some of many other skin conditions that may appear similar. 1  
Treatment and outlook depend on the underlying cause. 1  Antihistamines may help to reduce the itch. 2  5  The rash typically resolves with successful cancer treatment. 3  
The condition is rare. 1  Males are affected twice as frequently as females. 1  J. A. Gammel first described the condition in 1952. 6  7 
Erythema gyratum repens characteristically presents as wavy red lines on the skin. 1  These regular whirly rings rapidly and repetitively appear within existing ones, expanding outward at a rate of up to 1cm a day, giving the impression that the rash is moving. 3  The resulting pattern is similar to wood grain. 1  There is typically an intense itch and scale over the leading edge, which may be slightly raised. 2  The trunk and limbs are most frequently affected. 5  Thickening of the skin of the palms co-exists in around 10% of affected individuals, whatever the underlying cause. 1  The skin may become extremely dry. 3  Onset is generally in older adults; after the age of 60-years. 1  
The cause is believed to have an immunological base. 4  80% of cases have an underlying cancer, of which almost half have lung cancer. 1  Other cancers reported to be associated include cancers of the oesophagus and breast, and less frequently gastric cancer, uterine cancer, throat cancer, pancreas cancer and lymphoma. 1  The rash generally precedes the cancer diagnosis by around 9-months. 2  Less frequently, the cause may be tuberculosis of the lung, or no cause is found. 3  Other rare reported associations have included cryptogenic organizing pneumonia and rheumatoid arthritis. 2 
Diagnosis is generally by its appearance. 3  Tests include blood tests such as a complete blood count which may reveal raised eosinophils. 2  Other blood tests include PSA, antinuclear antibodies and biochemistry. 1  Medical imaging may locate a cancer; chest X-ray, mammogram, CT scan of pelvis and abdomen. 1  If indicated then an endoscopy may be required; colonoscopy, gastroscopy. 1 
Necrolytic migratory erythema, erythema migrans, tinea corporis, erythrokeratodermia variabilis, and subacute cutaneous lupus erythematosus are some of many other skin conditions that may appear similar. 1 
Treatment and outlook depend on the underlying cause. 1  Antihistamines may help to reduce the itch, although the role of applying a steroid cream is unclear. 2  5  The rash typically resolves with successful cancer treatment. 3  
The condition is rare. 1  Males are affected twice as frequently as females. 1  
J. A. Gammel first described the condition in 1952, in an individual who was later found to have breast cancer. 6  7 
