China Everbright Limited  is a Hong Kong-based financial services company in asset management, investment and merchant bank in the Greater China region, including Mainland China and Hong Kong. 2  It is part of the China Everbright Group, a state-owned enterprise operated under the supervision of the State Council of the People's Republic of China .
China Everbright Limited is considered a red chip stock on the Hong Kong Stock Exchange.
The predecessor of the company was founded on 25 August 1972 in Hong Kong as Intercontinental Housing Development Limited, renamed IHD Holdings in 1987. In 1994 it was taken over by China Everbright Group and renamed China Everbright-IHD Pacific Limited. On 18 July 1997, the business inherited from IHD was ended, the company was renamed China Everbright Limited, the current name. 3  On the same day, a 20% stake of China Everbright Bank was injected from the parent company, China Everbright Group, followed by International Bank of Asia on 2 August. 4  On 18 July 1999, Everbright Limited acquired a 49% stake of Everbright Securities from the parent company. 4 
In 2002, a 35% stake of Standard Life  Limited was sold to Standard Life. 4  In 2003, SeaBright Asset Management Limited was founded, a joint venture with Seagate Global Advisors . 4  In 2000s Everbright Limited acted as sponsor 5  in numbers of firm listing in Hong Kong Stock Exchange, for example, Zijin Mining in 2003. 4 
In 2011, a 51% stake of Everbright Securities  was sold to Everbright Securities, 4  Everbright Limited remained a minority shareholder of Everbright Securities, while Everbright Group is the largest shareholder.
In 2016, the company acquired the concession of Tirana International Airport, which runs until 2027. The company was the largest shareholder of China Aircraft Leasing Group Holdings.
Prior to 2002, Everbright had no asset management department. Mr. Guo You, the CEO at the time set a goal to make Everbright one of China's premier investment firms. To fast track the asset management business he hired William Lawton as CEO of the new asset management company. citation needed 
Everbright conducts its business activities in three areas: short-term investments, financial services and long-term investments plus other operations. The Company provides portfolio management services for institutional and individual clients, such as China Everbright Dragon Fund, or its SeaBright China Special Opportunities Fund series of direct investment funds, the first of the series that was launched in 2004 in a joint venture with Seagate Global Advisors, LLC. It provides financial advisory services, such as share placements, mergers and acquisitions , privatization and project financing. citation needed 
