Bull Gap is a 60-acre  hill climb area located in Michigan and links over 115 miles  of trails for legal off-road vehicle  use.
Bull Gap Hill itself is a sand dune centrally located within the 115-mile  Bull Gap trail system.  This system is composed mainly of 50-inch-wide  one-way sand and loose dirt trails.  The trails twist through predominantly public land and link the cities of Luzerne, Michigan, McKinley, Michigan, Mio, Michigan, and South Branch, Michigan.  Each of these communities has passed local ordinances legalizing the use of ATVs on the shoulders of most public roads and offer trail users easy access to food, fuel, lodging, and the occasional adult beverage. 1   The hill is this trail system's most popular waypoint and meeting place.  It offers a large open area with the opportunity to push the limits of an off-road vehicle and challenge friends or compete with strangers to an up-hill drag race.
Bull Gap is located in the vicinity of Mio, Michigan. Mio is about 30 miles  due East of Grayling, Michigan and about 30 miles  due North of West Branch, Michigan.  The majority of the trail system is contained within the Huron-Manistee National Forest and has parts of the Au Sable River passing through. The Huron-Manistee National Forest, in the northern part of Michigan's Lower Peninsula, provides ORV enthusiasts an opportunity to ride off-road vehicles on superb forest trails. Following the legal guidelines will ensure the ride is safe and enjoyable. For questions relating to state laws and regulations please visit the Michigan Department of Natural Resources website , there you will also be able to obtain an ORV sticker  and maps of this and other state trail systems.
According to the Michigan Hand Book of Off-Road Vehicle Laws  "Michigan law defines an ORV as any motor vehicle that can be operated cross-country  over land, snow, and other natural terrain. This includes: multi-track or multi-wheeled vehicles; all-terrain vehicles ; motorcycles or related multi-wheeled vehicles; amphibious machines ; hovercraft; and other vehicles that use mechanical power including 2- or 4-wheel-drive vehicles that are highway registered but operated off highways or off roads."  This trail system is also patrolled to ensure that all ORV operators and all passengers wear a U.S. Department of Transportation– approved crash helmet and protective eyewear or goggles except when the ORV is equipped with an approved roof and the operator and passengers are wearing properly adjusted and fastened safety belts. Also, each rider must utilize a U.S. Forest Service–approved spark arrestor and muffler in good working condition, in constant operation, and meeting applicable sound-level standards.  Finally, a State of Michigan ORV sticker must be purchased on a yearly basis and clearly displayed on each vehicle.
In an interview conducted on Monday February 16, 2009, Mr. Jonathan S. Byrd said, "Bull Gap's trail systems are some of the best trails in the great lakes area. The diversity of the scenery and wildlife make every trip an adventure. Having traveled to other states and explored various trail systems the Bull Gap trail systems are by far some of the most enjoyable to experience."
In an interview conducted on Wednesday February 18, 2009, Mrs. Christine L. Baker said, "Out of all the trails I have ever ridden Bull Gap is by far my favorite.  The Sandy Soil is very forgiving and there are lots of nice changes in elevation."
And finally, on February 18, 2009, Mr. Randall M Baker said, "Bull Gap is one of the best places to off-road in the state.  It has a wide variety of trail types ranging from open fast and straight to tight, twisty, slow and dangerous.  The DNR grades it about once a month but that does not stop some areas from getting extremely bumpy and dipped-out.  The only other major downfall of the trail system is the dust.  During the hot dry summer months the entire area can get extremely dusty making it sometimes difficult to see five feet ahead of you. As long as you are well prepared this system can provide days of enjoyment for everyone from the beginner dirt bike rider to those with advanced bike or Atv riding skills."
The Huron-Manistee National Forests comprise almost 1,000,000 acres  of public lands extending across the northern lower peninsula of Michigan. The Huron-Manistee National Forests provide recreation opportunities for visitors, habitat for fish and wildlife, and resources for local industry. In 1909, the Huron National Forest was established and the Manistee National Forest was formed in 1938. In 1945, these two National Forests were administratively combined. Working hand in hand with the Michigan Department of Natural Resources and other partners, the Forest Service has changed the "lands that nobody wanted" to healthy forests again. 2  This forest offers the general public the opportunity to camp, hike, snowmobile, boat/canoe, sightsee, fish, hunt, cross-country ski, bike or hike. Visit the state forests website for more information 
.mw-parser-output .geo-default,.mw-parser-output .geo-dms,.mw-parser-output .geo-dec.mw-parser-output .geo-nondefault,.mw-parser-output .geo-multi-punct,.mw-parser-output .geo-inline-hidden.mw-parser-output .longitude,.mw-parser-output .latitude44°37′01″N 84°01′44″W  /  44.61696°N 84.02894°W  / 44.61696; -84.02894
