1 Samuel 17 is the seventeenth chapter of the First Book of Samuel in the Old Testament of the Christian Bible or the first part of the Books of Samuel in the Hebrew Bible. 1  According to Jewish tradition the book was attributed to the prophet Samuel, with additions by the prophets Gad and Nathan, 2  but modern scholars view it as a composition of a number of independent texts of various ages from c. 630–540 BCE. 3  4  This chapter contains the battle of
David with Goliath, the Philistine. 5  This is within a section comprising 1 Samuel 16 to 2 Samuel 5 which records the rise of David as the king of Israel. 6 
This chapter was originally written in the Hebrew language. It is divided into 58 verses.
Some early manuscripts containing the text of this chapter in Hebrew are of the Masoretic Text tradition, which includes the Codex Cairensis , Aleppo Codex , and Codex Leningradensis . 7  Fragments containing parts of this chapter in Hebrew were found among the Dead Sea Scrolls including 4Q51  with extant verses 3–8, 40–41. 8  9  10  11 
Extant ancient manuscripts of a translation into Koine Greek known as the Septuagint  include Codex Vaticanus  and Codex Alexandrinus . 12  a  The text in the Codex Vaticanus is notably shorter than the others, consisting only of verses 1–11, 32–40, 42–48a, 49, 51–54. 14 
The section comprising 1 Samuel 16 to 2 Samuel 5 is known as the "History of David's Rise", with David as the central character, within which 1 Samuel 16:1 to 2 Samuel 1:27 form an independent unit with a central theme of "the decline of Saul and the rise of David". 6  This narrative provides the test of David's suitability to the throne, in contrast to the testing of Jonathan at Michmash . 14  It was emphasized that David did not enter into battle with Goliath because of 'arrogance or a spirit of adventure', but because he followed God's plan. 15  The portrayal of David as a shepherd in this narrative had 'royal' connotations . 16 
After an unknown period of time, the Philistines again started a military action against Israel, assembling their army near Sochoh, a strategic passage between the Philistine and Israel territories. 17  Saul assembled the Israel army at the opposite side of the Elah valley, anticipating a battle. 18  However, this time, a gigantic man, Goliath, stepped up out of the Philistines, a seasoned veteran, wearing the most advanced weapons, challenging anyone among the Israel army for one-on-one combat, instead of thousands soldiers battling, to decide the outcome – winner takes all. 18   
In his challenge, Goliath explicitly called for Saul  perhaps in reference to Saul being the tallest among the Israelites , but Saul and all Israel soldiers were too afraid to accept the challenge. 18 
The verse detailed the scene of David's memorable battle with Goliath with great exactness. The Philistines and Israel army camped on opposite sides of the wide valley of Elah  to their rendezvous at Sochoh, and the Philistines pitched their camp in Ephes-dammim. 20 
Most of the extant Hebrew manuscripts are based on Masoretic Text , but older manuscripts, such as from Symmachus, a Jewish translator of Hebrew texts to Greek in 200s CE for the Jewish community in Caesarea, cited by Origen in the fourth column of Hexapla and assumed to be "proto-MT" , as well as Greek version of Origen in the fifth column of Hexapla have "6 cubits and a span". 33  Billington suggests that the "4 cubits and a span" in the Septuagint and 4QSama could be a conversion from MT's data of common cubits  into a measurement using royal Egyptian cubits . 34 
Average height of men at the end of first century BCE in the Middle East and Mediterranean area was estimated based on the skeletons in some tombs to be about 3.5 cubits  to about 175 cm. 35  Whether it was 2 or 3 meters, the mention of Goliath's height certainly played a role for the Israelites to fear him, although in the whole chapter Goliath was never referred to as a "giant". 36  37  However, Saul, being a tall person himself , was more concerned about Goliath's extensive military training . 38  Therefore, the emphasis of mentioning Goliath's height in the narrative is that Saul, possessing unique height, weapons and armor among the Israelites, should be the logical choice to fight Goliath, but he was cowering in fear instead of delivering Israel. 39 
The narrative changes from the battleground to the hometown of David with specific information that Jesse, David's father, did not participate in the war because he was very old, but his three oldest sons were in the battlefield with Saul. 18  While Saul was with his army, David was apparently excused to go home from his service to provide music for the king, so David was back tending his family's sheep. 18  Forty days had passed since the army was assembled and Goliath first came out to challenge the Israelites. Jesse became worried about his sons, so he decided to send David to the front lines to get the news of their wellbeing. 45  After arranging interim care for his flock, David went to the army campsite, bringing bread for his siblings and cheese for their commander. Right at the time David found his brothers, he heard Goliath's challenge and became angry at the insults to his God, a reaction that set him apart from all other Israelites in that place. 45  David regarded Goliath's defying "the armies of Israel"  as nothing less than defying "the armies of the living God" . 45  Then, David heard about the reward promised by Saul to the one who could defeat Goliath , and he kept inquiring of some people to make sure this information was true , even after Eliab, his eldest brother, wrongly accused David as just wanting to watch the battle. 45  It could be argued that David's multiple inquiries—each time resulting in the same answer—were actually intended to 'get it on record' with those people as his witnesses for the reward he would get when he succeeded in winning the combat. 46 
When the news of David inquiring about the reward reached Saul, the king summoned David, but showed his objection to David's appearance as a youth to fight Goliath, who was a "warrior"  'since his youth'. 46  Saul apparently ignored the words of his attendants in the previous chapter, that David was a "brave man" and a "warrior" . 46  To counter Saul's objection, David spoke about his victories against lions and bears in close combat, without mentioning his sling, because a battle against Goliath was supposed to be a "single-armed infantry combat". 51  David's words convinced Saul, who declared "YHWH be with" David . 52 
Saul wanted to lend his personal armor to dress David for battle, hoping that in a victory he could claim some responsibility, but after trying them on, David declined to use it because he was not used to dressing like that and, as later was shown, his battle plan would not require the armor. 52 
Among the three basic divisions of army in ancient warfare, "infantry"  in formation could take out "cavalry"  with pikes, cavalry could take out "artillery"  by their speed to close in the distance, whereas artillery could take out slow-moving infantry from afar, not unlike the game of 'rock-paper-scissors', so here David chose to be a projectile slinger against Goliath who was an infantry unit. 53 
David approached Goliath in the battlefield with a staff in one hand, five smooth stones freshly picked out of a stream inside his 'shepherd bag', and his sling in his 'other hand' . 54  The staff could be a successful distraction from his sling, because Goliath only noticed the staff when he mocked David for approaching him with "sticks" . 54  Not only was David praised for being handsome and brave, but Saul's servants also recognized David's rhetorical skill , which he showed at this time with theological clarity and power to answer Goliath's cursing by his gods. 54  David was confident that Goliath's superior weapons  would be no match to YHWH, which would prove to "all nations that there is a God in Israel"  and would give all Philistines into Israel's hands. 54  In contrast to Israel rejecting God by requesting to be led by a king "like all other nations" , David declared that the battle was YHWH's, not the army's, not the kings', bringing back YHWH as the leader of His people. 55 
At David's words, Goliath made a move toward David, but with his heavy metal armor which weights hundreds of pounds, he could not match David's quicker movement with much less armor, and when David was fast approaching with a sling on his hand, not planning to use his staff at all, it became clearer that the 'rock beats scissors'  strategy would make David no longer an underdog. 56  David deftly shot at Goliath's forehead, which was not covered by his helmet, with the slinged stone using a tremendous force, so the stone 'sank' into Goliath's head and the giant 'fell face first to the ground' . 56  Not taking any chances that Goliath would wake up again soon, David took out Goliath's own sword and used it to cut off its owner's head. 56  Seeing this, all Philistines fled, pursued by the Israelites, whereas David took Goliath's weapons as victor's spoils into 'his tent' and even already planned to bring Goliath's head to "Jerusalem" . 56 
The narrative looks back to the time David was about to fight Goliath, while Saul looked on and asked Abner, his general, who David's father was. 56  At a glance, this seems to contradict the account in the previous chapter, that Saul was informed about David, the son of Jesse  and twice sent messengers to Jesse . 56  However, rather than a possibility of memory lapse due to mental illness, the question may be a hint for Abner to check deeper into David's family background, apparently in the context to Saul's promise of tax exemption for family of the one killing the giant , but also in relation to Saul's suspicion of anyone among his 'friends/neighbors', who would succeed him, as told in multiple occasions. 63  Fast forward to the time Abner brought David, still holding Goliath's head, to Saul, the king did not offer congratulations or thanks, but focused for the inquiry of David's family, an indication that Saul began to see David as a rival. 63 
