Blood pool agents  are a class of magnetic resonance angiography contrast agents. 1  2  Blood pool agents  are differentiated from other contrast agents due to their high molecular weight and higher relaxivities. 3  Their large size prevents diffusion through the vascular epithelium and leakage into the interstitial space, and because of this they stay in the vascular system for a longer time period. Most contrast agents, leave the vascular system within a few minutes, however blood pool agents remain in the circulation for up to an hour, extending the window available for imaging. Longer image acquisition times allow better signal-to-noise ratio and improved image resolution.
Due to their extended time in the circulatory system, blood pool agents can be used for delayed steady-state imaging, and additionally these results can be combined with first pass arterial imaging. 2  3  Their extended circulation time means that they are able to be used for both arterial and venous mapping. Additional uses include: detection of gastrointestinal bleeding; visualization of the vasculature associated with certain tumors; measuring tissue blood volume and perfusion; and detection of endovascular leaks . citation needed 
This class of BPAs is based on the noncovalent binding of low molecular weight Gd3+-based complexes to human serum albumin. The first commercial agent to be approved in this class is gadofosveset trisodium 4  . Many clinical and case studies documenting the use of this BPA have been published, 8  9  10  11  12  13  14  and its efficacy in enhancing blood vessels visibility has been demonstrated. 15  The manufacturer  discontinued production in 2017 though, due to poor sales. 16 
Gadocoletic acid 17  , also known as B-22956 and B22956/1, is a Gd-DTPA derivative that is currently in development, but has not yet been approved for clinical use.
Gadobenic acid  is sometimes categorized as a BPA; however, as it only binds weakly to albumin and because hepatobiliary uptake of this compound occurs, this contrast agent should not be classified as a BPA.
Polymeric Gd3+ chelates are large in size, which prevents leakage into the interstitial space, and provides long imaging windows. Several polymeric gadolinium-based BPAs are currently in development but have not yet been approved for clinical use:
Gadomelitol 19  , also known as Vistarem and P792
Gadomer-17 20   also known as Gd-DTPA-17, SH L 643 A.
