
Mary Elizabeth Truss  is a British politician who served as Prime Minister of the United Kingdom and Leader of the Conservative Party from September to October 2022. On her fiftieth day in office, she stepped down amid a government crisis, making her the shortest-serving prime minister in the history of the United Kingdom. Truss previously held various Cabinet positions under prime ministers David Cameron, Theresa May and Boris Johnson, lastly as foreign secretary from 2021 to 2022. She has been the member of Parliament  for South West Norfolk since 2010.
Truss studied philosophy, politics and economics at Merton College, Oxford, and was the president of Oxford University Liberal Democrats. In 1996, she joined the Conservative Party. She worked at Shell and Cable & Wireless and was the deputy director of the think tank Reform. After two unsuccessful attempts to be elected to the House of Commons, she was elected as the MP for South West Norfolk at the 2010 general election. As a backbencher, she called for reform in several policy areas including childcare, mathematics education and the economy. Truss founded the Free Enterprise Group of Thatcherite Conservative MPs and wrote or co-wrote a number of papers and books, including After the Coalition  and Britannia Unchained .
Truss served as the parliamentary under-secretary of state for childcare and education from 2012 to 2014, before Cameron appointed her secretary of state for the environment, food and rural affairs in a cabinet reshuffle. Although she supported the Britain Stronger in Europe campaign for the UK to remain in the European Union, Truss supported Brexit after the outcome of the 2016 referendum. Following Cameron's resignation in 2016, his successor Theresa May appointed her as secretary of state for justice and lord chancellor, making Truss the first woman to serve as lord chancellor in the office's thousand-year history. After the 2017 general election, Truss was made the chief secretary to the Treasury. After May resigned in 2019, Truss supported Johnson's successful bid to become Conservative leader and prime minister, after which he appointed Truss as secretary of state for international trade and president of the Board of Trade in July 2019; she subsequently took on the additional role of minister for women and equalities in September 2019. Johnson promoted Truss to foreign secretary in the 2021 cabinet reshuffle. During her time in the position, Truss co-chaired the EU–UK Partnership Council, led negotiations on the Northern Ireland Protocol and was involved in the UK's response to the Russian invasion of Ukraine.
Truss defeated Rishi Sunak in the leadership election to succeed Johnson, who had resigned in an earlier government crisis. Truss was appointed as prime minister by Elizabeth II two days before the monarch's death; her government's business was subsequently suspended during a national mourning period of 10 days. In response to the cost of living and energy supply crises, her ministry announced the Energy Price Guarantee to limit energy prices for households, businesses and public-sector organisations. Her government then announced large-scale borrowing and tax cuts, which was widely criticised and largely reversed after financial instability. Facing mounting criticism and loss of confidence in her leadership, Truss announced her resignation as leader of the Conservative Party; 1  Sunak was elected unopposed as her successor, and succeeded her as prime minister. Truss remains in the House of Commons as a backbencher.
Mary Elizabeth Truss was born on 26 July 1975 at the John Radcliffe Hospital in Oxford, England. 2  She was the second child of John and Priscilla Truss ; the year prior to Truss's birth, their first son, named Matthew, had died. 2  b  Truss was known by her middle name Elizabeth since early childhood, her father, a professor of pure mathematics at the University of Leeds, calling her such. 6  2  After being given a badge with "Mary" on it on her first day of school, Truss had asked her teacher that it be changed. 7  Truss later described her parents' politics as being "to the left of Labour"; 8  her mother, a nurse, was a member of the Campaign for Nuclear Disarmament. 9  10  When Truss later stood for election to Parliament as a Conservative, her mother agreed to campaign with her, but her father declined to do so. 11  12  Her parents divorced in 2003. 4  13 
he stands out in my memory as a sort of strange, unfocused force, hugely in favor of action and change ... it was always hard to see the aim of it all, or where it might lead, except that she would be at the center of it.
Julian Glover on Truss, his former schoolmate. 14 
In 1977, Truss and her parents moved to Warsaw, Poland, but returned to Britain after John and Priscilla found it "grim". 15  After living briefly in Kidderminster, Worcestershire, the family moved to Paisley, Renfrewshire when Truss was four years old, with Truss attending West Primary School. 16  17  In 1985, they moved south to Leeds, where Truss attended Roundhay School; she later said that at the school "I saw kids ... being let down", a claim which was heavily criticised by former Roundhay pupils. 18  19  20  When Truss was 12, she and her family spent a year in Burnaby, British Columbia, where she attended Parkcrest Elementary School whilst her father taught at Simon Fraser University. 21  Truss praised the Canadian curriculum and the attitude that it was "really good to be top of the class", which she contrasted to her education at Roundhay. 10  A classmate recalled Truss as being "very smart" and that she was "confident, chatty,  tried to get to know everyone". 22  
Truss's parents had initially wanted her to study at the University of Cambridge, but Truss instead elected to go to Oxford in a "bout of teenage rebellion". 23  She applied for Merton College, but was instead listed as a candidate for the all-women's St Hilda's College; she then complained to both colleges, after which she was accepted for Merton. 24  Truss read philosophy, politics and economics, graduating in 1996. 25  During her time at university, Truss was active in the Liberal Democrats. She became the president of the Oxford University Liberal Democrats in her first year 26  and a member of the national executive committee of Liberal Democrat Youth and Students  in 1995. 27  During a previous unsuccessful bid for the LDYS executive, the party's leader, Paddy Ashdown, said Truss was "a good debater and is utterly fearless". 27  During her time as a Lib Dem, Truss supported the legalisation of cannabis and the abolition of the monarchy, 28  29  and campaigned against the Criminal Justice and Public Order Act 1994. 30  However, by November 1995, Truss had become critical of the Lib Dems, as she "realised the Tory Party was saying quite sane things"; in her last year at the university, she resigned from the LDYS. 29  By 1996, Truss was involved in Conservative Party politics. 31 
From 1996 to 2000, Truss worked for Shell plc, living in Lewisham and Greenwich and qualifying as a Chartered Management Accountant . 32  33  In 2000, Truss was employed by Cable & Wireless plc and rose to the position of economic director before leaving in 2005; 34  one of her colleagues there, George Robertson, said that Truss "had a passion for politics ... she  fresh minded, enthusiastic and the Tory Party needed people like that". 35 
In January 2008, after losing her first two elections, Truss became the deputy director of Reform, a centre-right think tank, where she advocated for greater effort on countering serious and organised crime, higher standards in schools and action to tackle the UK's "falling competitiveness". 36  33  She co-authored The Value of Mathematics, 36  Fit for Purpose, 37  A New Level, 36  and Back To Black, 38  39  and other reports.
Whilst working at Shell, Truss served as the chair of the Lewisham Deptford Conservative Association from 1998 to 2000, having been introduced to the branch by her friend and future MP, Jackie Doyle-Price. 40  31  During this time, Truss met her future husband, Hugh O'Leary at a reception at the Greenwich Conservative Association. 31  Truss unsuccessfully stood for election twice in Greenwich London Borough Council for Vanbrugh ward in 1998 and Blackheath Westcombe in 2002. 41  42  The deputy leader of Greenwich Conservatives, Graeme Coombes, recalled in 2022 that "she said  she was hoping to stand for Parliament ... she was destined for bigger and better things". 43  However, Alex Grant, the candidate who had defeated her Truss in 2002, called her "largely invisible during the campaign". 13  After two failed attempts running for Greenwich London Borough Council, Truss was elected for Eltham South in the 2006 council election. 44  Truss did not seek re-election to the council in 2010, standing down the day she became an MP. 45 
At the 2001 general election, Truss stood for the constituency of Hemsworth in West Yorkshire, a safe seat for the Labour Party. She came a distant second, but increased the conservative vote by 3.2 per cent. 46  47  Before the 2005 general election, the parliamentary candidate for Calder Valley, Sue Catling, was pressured to resign by the local Conservative Association; 48  Truss was selected to fight the seat. She narrowly lost the election to the Labour Party incumbent.
Under David Cameron as Conservative leader, Truss was added to the party's "A-List". 47  In October 2009, she was selected for the South West Norfolk seat by members of the constituency Conservative Association. She won over 50 per cent of the vote in the first round of the final against five other candidates. 49  50  Shortly after her selection, some members of the constituency association objected to Truss's selection, due to her failing to declare a prior affair with the married Conservative MP Mark Field. 51  A motion was proposed to terminate Truss's candidature, but this was defeated by 132 votes to 37 at a general meeting of the association's members three weeks later. 52 
Following her election to the House of Commons, Truss campaigned for issues including the retention of the RAF Tornado base at RAF Marham in her constituency; 53  over seven months she asked 13 questions in the Commons about RAF Marham, secured a special debate on the subject, wrote dozens of letters to ministers and collected signatures on a petition which was delivered to Downing Street. 54  From the start of her parliamentary career, she also lobbied for the dualling of the A11 west of Thetford; 55  the work was completed in 2014. 56  "With an eye on Thetford Forest, in her constituency, she spoke out against the proposal to sell off forests" 57  and played "a leading role" in preventing a waste incinerator being built at King's Lynn. 54 
In March 2011, Truss wrote a paper for the liberal think tank CentreForum in which she argued for an end to bias against serious academic subjects in the education system so that social mobility can be improved. 58  Truss wrote a further paper for the same think tank in May 2012, in which she argued for change in the structure of the childcare market in Britain. 59 
In October 2011, Truss founded the Free Enterprise Group, which has been supported by over 40 other Conservative MPs. 60  In September 2011, together with four other members of the Free Enterprise Group, she had co-authored After the Coalition, a book which sought to challenge the consensus that Britain's economic decline is inevitable by arguing for the return of a more entrepreneurial and meritocratic culture. 61 
Britannia Unchained was published on 13 September 2012 by the same authors as above. In Chapter 4, which is named "Work Ethic" , the book states: "Once they enter the workplace, the British are among the worst idlers in the world. We work among the lowest hours, we retire early and our productivity is poor." 62  63  During a BBC leadership debate in July 2022, Truss said that the authors had each written a different chapter of the book and that Dominic Raab had written chapter 4 which contains those claims. 64  65  Raab later remarked that the authors had taken "collective responsibility" for the book. 64  As part of a serialisation in The Daily Telegraph, Truss wrote an article previewing Britannia Unchained. 66  The book was promoted by its publishers as the work of "the Conservative Party's rising stars". 67 
Truss has championed Britain following Germany's lead in allowing people to have tax-free and less heavily regulated "mini-jobs". 68  Since Truss published a paper on the policy for the Free Enterprise Group in February 2012, the policy has been examined by the Treasury as a policy to promote growth. 69  70 
Truss has campaigned for improved teaching of more rigorous school subjects, especially mathematics. citation needed  She noted in 2012 that only 20% of British students studied maths to 18, 71  and called for maths classes to be compulsory for all those in full-time education. 72  Truss herself studied maths and further maths at A level. 71  She argued in 2011 that comprehensive school pupils were being "mis-sold" easy, low-value subjects to boost school results: comprehensive school pupils were six times as likely to take media studies at A-level as privately educated pupils. 73  Truss also criticised the over-reliance on calculators to the detriment of mental arithmetic. 74 
From March 2011, Truss was a Member of the Justice Select Committee, 75  remaining on the committee until her appointment as a government minister.
On 4 September 2012, Truss was appointed as parliamentary under-secretary of state at the Department for Education, responsible for childcare and early learning, assessment, qualifications, curriculum reform, behaviour and attendance, and school food review. 76  In this role, she developed some of the policy areas that she had pursued as a backbencher.
In January 2013, she announced proposals to reform A-Levels, by concentrating examinations at the end of two-year courses. 77  She sought to improve British standards in maths for fear that children are falling behind those in Asian countries, 78  and led a fact-finding visit to schools and teacher-training centres in Shanghai in February 2014 to see how children there have become the best in the world at maths. 79 
Truss also outlined plans to reform childcare in England, which would overhaul childcare qualifications and increase the maximum number of children relative to adults in a care establishment, with the intention of widening the availability of childcare along with increasing pay and qualifications among staff. 80  The proposed reforms were broadly welcomed by some organisations such as the charity 4Children, 81  the Confederation of British Industry 82  and the College of West Anglia. 83  The proposals met opposition from others. The TUC General Secretary Frances O'Grady and the then Shadow Education Secretary Stephen Twigg were among those criticising the reforms, 84  and were echoed by some parents and childcare bodies, such as the charity National Day Nurseries Association. 85 
The columnist Polly Toynbee was highly critical of the minister's plans and challenged Truss to demonstrate how to care for two babies alongside four toddlers on her own. 86  Truss responded to Toynbee's challenge by saying that being an early educator was a very demanding job, requiring great and specialist expertise, for which she was not trained. 87  In the event, aspects of the reforms relating to relaxation of childcare ratios were blocked by the Deputy Prime Minister Nick Clegg, 88  who said: "The response, not just from nurseries, but overwhelmingly from parent groups was they thought this was a bad idea." 89 
In the 2014 cabinet reshuffle, Truss was appointed secretary of state for environment, food and rural affairs. 90  Originally, Truss was to be made a minister of state, before Cameron changed his mind on the morning of the reshuffle. 91  Truss's predecessor Owen Paterson "stormed out" of Cameron's Commons study when told he was to be dismissed; nevertheless, he told Truss "this is my phone number. Ring me any time you want help". 92  Paterson was dismissed partially due to his his plans for a badger cull, which Truss later supported. 93  Truss's early actions at the department included setting up a "food crime unit" to prevent incidents similar to the recent horse meat scandal, approving planning for the Thames Tideway Tunnel, 94  and development of Flood Re. 95 
At the Conservative Party conference in September 2014, Truss made a speech in which she said "we import two-thirds of our cheese. That. Is. A. Dis-grace" 96  and "in December, I'll be in Beijing, opening up new pork markets." Four days after Truss delivered the speech, parts of the video were featured on the satirical panel show Have I Got News For You, 97  with the awkward, stilted delivery leading her to be mocked; clips of the speech went viral online. 98 
In November 2014, Truss launched a new 10-year bee and pollinator strategy to try to reverse the trend of falling bee populations, 99  including a strategy to revive traditional meadows which provide the most fertile habitat for pollinators. In July 2015, she approved the limited temporary lifting of an EU ban on the use of two neonicotinoid pesticides, enabling their use for 120 days on about 5 per cent of England's oilseed rape crop to ward off the cabbage-stem flea beetle; 100  campaigners in 2012 warned that pesticides were shown to harm bees by damaging their renowned ability to navigate home. 101  Truss cut taxpayer subsidies for solar panels on agricultural land, as her view was that the land could be better used to grow crops, food and vegetables. 102  She described farming and food as "hotbeds of innovation" 103  and promoted the production and export of British food. 104  In March 2015, Truss was one of two cabinet ministers to vote against the government's successful proposal to introduce plain packaging for cigarettes, in what was a free vote. 105  When she had been asked previously about plain packaging during a constituency meeting, Truss said "when it comes to things like this, I take a more libertarian approach ... I don't know if it's the government's role to regulate this". 106 
In July 2016, Truss was appointed as secretary of state for justice and lord chancellor in the first May ministry, becoming the first female lord chancellor in the office's thousand–year history. 107  c  May's decision to appoint her was criticised by the minister of state for justice Edward Faulks who resigned from the government, questioning whether Truss would "have the clout to be able to stand up to the prime minister when necessary, on behalf of the judges". 110  Other Conservative members of Parliament also criticised Truss's appointment owing to her lack of legal experience; in response, Truss's supporters accused one of the MPs, Bob Neill, of "thinly veiled misogyny". 111  112 
Before Truss's arrival, the Ministry of Justice's budget had been subjected to successive deep cuts under the coalition government, affecting prisons and blamed for their rising rates of violence owing to a drop in the number of prison officers. 113  Truss lobbied the chancellor of the Exchequer Philip Hammond for £104 million in order to hire an extra 2,500 officers, which Hammond reluctantly delivered. 114  115  116  In November 2016, Truss was again criticised for failing to support the judiciary after three judges of the Divisional Court came under attack from politicians and from the Daily Mail—which ran with the headline "Enemies of the People"—for ruling against the government on whether Article 50 could be triggered without Parliament's approval. 117  A former lord chancellor, Charlie Falconer, suggested that, like her immediate predecessors, Truss lacked legal expertise, called for her to be dismissed as justice secretary as her perceived inadequate response " to the judges that they have lost their constitutional protector". 118  Truss denied she had failed to defend the judges, writing:
An independent judiciary is the cornerstone of the rule of law, vital to our constitution and freedoms. It is my duty as lord chancellor to defend that independence. I swore to do so under my oath of office. I take that very seriously, and I will always do so. 119 his is a dream job for you. This job will be the making of you.
Gillian Shephard advising Truss after her appointment as chief secretary. 120 
On 11 June, following the 2017 general election, May demoted Truss from justice secretary to chief secretary to the Treasury, meaning she could attend cabinet meetings but was not a full member. 121  122  Truss was enraged and called the demotion "incredibly unfair" and was "seething for a good couple of days". 123  Truss developed an enthusiasm for cultivating her presence on Twitter and Instagram. The Times described this as an unorthodox approach that had won her fans. 124  125  She was also closely involved in the launch of the free market campaign group, Freer. 126  Some of her civil servants were reported as finding her tenure as chief secretary "exhausting", because of her demanding work schedule and her habit of asking officials multiplication questions at random intervals. 127 
In June 2018, Truss gave a speech outlining her declared commitment to freedom and individual liberty. She criticised regulations that get in the way of people's lives and warned that raising taxes could see the Conservatives being "crushed" at the polls; 128  in particular, she criticised ministerial colleagues who she said should realise "that it's not macho just to demand more money. It's much tougher to demand better value and challenge the blob of vested interests within your department". 129  In 2019, Truss declared that she could be a candidate for the leadership of the Conservative Party to succeed May. 130  She ultimately elected not to stand, and instead endorsed Johnson. 131 
After Johnson became prime minister, Truss was tipped for promotion in return for her support during his leadership campaign, during which she advised Johnson on economic policy, and was the architect of plans to cut taxes for people earning over £50,000. 127  Consequently, it was thought she would be appointed chancellor of the Exchequer or business secretary, but she was instead promoted to the position of secretary of state for international trade and president of the Board of Trade. 132  Following the resignation of Amber Rudd, Truss was additionally appointed minister for women and equalities.
Twice in September 2019, Truss said that the Department for International Trade had "inadvertently" allowed shipping of radio spares and an air cooler to Saudi Arabia in contravention of an order of the Court of Appeal, which found that UK arms sales to Saudi Arabia for use in the war in Yemen were unlawful. 133  134  135  While Truss apologised to a Commons committee on arms export controls, opposition MPs said her apology was insufficient and called for her to resign for breaking the law. 136 
On 19 March 2020, Truss introduced to Parliament the Trade Act 2021, which established the legal framework for the UK to conduct trade deals with nations around the world. 137  138 
On 7 July 2020, Truss announced the lifting of a year-long ban on the export of arms and military equipment to Saudi Arabia. 139  She said that "there is not a clear risk that the export of arms and military equipment to Saudi Arabia might be used in the commission of a serious violation of international humanitarian law." 140 
In August 2020, a number of meetings Truss held with the Institute of Economic Affairs were removed from the public record because they were recategorised as "personal discussions", which the Labour Party said raised concerns about integrity, transparency and honesty in public office. 141 
Truss undertook negotiations for a post-Brexit free trade agreement between the UK and Japan. 142  An agreement between the two countries was struck in September 2020, which Truss said would result in "99% of exports to Japan" being "tariff-free". It was the first major trade deal the UK had signed since leaving the European Union and was hailed as a "historic moment" by Truss; it mostly copied the existing trade deal the EU had agreed with Japan. 143  144  This was followed by newly negotiated trade deals with Australia, New Zealand, Norway, Iceland and Liechtenstein. 145 
In December 2020, Truss made a speech on equality policy in which she stated that the UK focused too heavily on "fashionable" race, sexuality, and gender issues at the expense of poverty and geographical disparity. In the speech, she announced that the government and civil service would no longer be receiving unconscious bias training. 146  147 
On 15 September 2021 during a cabinet reshuffle, Johnson promoted Truss from international trade secretary to secretary of state for foreign, Commonwealth and development affairs. 148 
At the 2021 United Nations Climate Change Conference in Glasgow, she said that France had acted unacceptably during the Jersey fishing dispute. 149 
In October 2021, she called on Russia to intervene in the Belarus–European Union border crisis 150  and said she wanted a "closer trading and investment relationship" with the Gulf Cooperation Council which includes Saudi Arabia and Qatar. 151  In November 2021, Truss and her Israeli counterpart Yair Lapid announced a new decade-long deal aimed at stopping Iran from developing nuclear weapons. 152  In December 2021, she met her Russian counterpart Sergey Lavrov in Stockholm, urging Russia to seek peace in Ukraine in the context of the Russo-Ukrainian War. 153 
On 5 November 2021, she called for a ceasefire in the Tigray War between Ethiopian rebel groups and the Ethiopian government led by Abiy Ahmed, saying that "there is no military solution and that negotiations are needed to avoid bloodshed and deliver lasting peace". 154 
In January 2022, the former Australian Prime Minister Paul Keating, who serves on the international board of the China Development Bank, 155  accused Truss of making "demented" comments about Chinese military aggression in the Pacific, saying that "Britain suffers delusions of grandeur and relevance deprivation". 156 Truss was appointed in December 2021 as the British Government's chief negotiator with the EU, following the resignation of Lord Frost. 157  On 30 January 2022, she told the BBC's Sunday Morning programme that "we are supplying and offering extra support into our Baltic allies across the Black Sea, as well as supplying the Ukrainians with defensive weapons". 158  The Russian diplomat Maria Zakharova commented, using social media, that the Baltic states are located on or near the Baltic Sea and not the Black Sea, which is 700 miles away from the Baltic. 159  Truss's scheduled trip to Ukraine was cancelled after she tested positive for COVID-19 on 31 January 2022. 160 
On 6 February 2022, Truss warned that "China must respect the Falklands' sovereignty" and defended the Falkland Islands as "part of the British family" after China backed Argentina's claim over islands. 161 
In October 2022, it was revealed that Truss's phone was hacked during her service as the foreign minister with Russian spies under suspicion for the act. 162 
On 10 February 2022, Truss again met Lavrov. In the context of tensions between Russia and the West over a build-up of Russian troops near the Russia–Ukraine border, talks between the two foreign ministers were described as "difficult". 163  Lavrov described the discussion as "turning out like the conversation of a mute and a deaf person". 164  He dismissed "demands to remove Russian troops from Russian territory" as "regrettable" and asked Truss if she recognised Russia's sovereignty over the Voronezh and Rostov regions, 165  two Russian provinces where Russian troops were deployed. 166  Later that day, the Foreign, Commonwealth and Development Office prepared legislation to allow for more sanctions on Russian organisations and individuals. 167  On 21 February 2022, Truss condemned Russia's diplomatic recognition of two self-proclaimed separatist republics in the Donbas in Ukraine. 168  She also stated that the British government would announce new sanctions against Russia. 169 Following Russia's invasion of Ukraine on 24 February, Truss was asked in a BBC interview on 27 February about a call from Ukrainian President Volodymyr Zelenskyy for foreigners to join the newly formed International Legion of Territorial Defense of Ukraine, and if she supported British volunteers joining, to which she responded: "Absolutely, if that is what they want to do". 170  The comments were criticised by some Conservative colleagues, including former Attorney General Dominic Grieve, who said that while "the comments of the foreign secretary may be entirely honourable and understandable", people going to Ukraine to fight without formal licences from the UK government would be in breach of the Foreign Enlistment Act 1870 and committing a criminal offence. 171  Following the Russian military's being placed on high nuclear alert on 27 February, Russian officials said it was in response to Truss's comments. 172  Boris Johnson's spokesperson later stated that British citizens should not travel to Ukraine to fight the Russians and dismissed a claim by the Kremlin that comments from Truss prompted the nuclear alert. 173 
At the end of February, Truss called on the G7 countries to limit the import of oil and natural gas from Russia. 174  She said the Russo-Ukrainian War could "last for years" and that it could mark the "beginning of the end" for Putin. 175  In March, Truss said it was necessary to "work with all of our allies around the world", including Saudi Arabia, so that the UK is no longer "dependent" on Russia for oil and natural gas. 176  She wanted to push Russia's economy "back into the Soviet era". 177  On 27 April 2022, Truss said that Western allies, including the UK, must "double down" and "keep going further and faster" to "push Russia out of the whole of Ukraine", including Crimea. 178  179  In July 2022, she blamed Putin for the emerging global energy and food crises. 180  181 
On 10 July 2022, Truss announced her intention to run in the Conservative Party leadership election to replace Boris Johnson. She pledged to cut taxes on day one if elected, and said she would "fight the election as a Conservative and govern as a Conservative", adding that she would also take "immediate action to help people deal with the cost of living". 182  She said she would cancel a planned rise in corporation tax and reverse the recent increase in National Insurance rates, funded by delaying the date by which the national debt is planned to fall, as part of a "long-term plan to bring down the size of the state and the tax burden". 183 
On 20 July, Truss and former Chancellor of the Exchequer Rishi Sunak were chosen by Conservative Party MPs to be put forward to the membership for the final leadership vote. She finished second in the final MPs ballot, receiving 113 votes to Sunak's 137 votes. 184  185  In the membership vote, it was announced on 5 September that 57.4% of ballots were for Truss, making her the new leader. 185 
As the elected Leader of the Conservative Party, the majority party in the House of Commons, Truss was appointed the new prime minister by Elizabeth II at Balmoral Castle on 6 September 2022. 186 Truss began appointing her cabinet and to other government positions on 6 September 2022. 187  With the appointment of Kwasi Kwarteng as chancellor of the Exchequer, James Cleverly as foreign secretary, and Suella Braverman as home secretary, for the first time in British political history, no white men held positions in the Great Offices of State. 188 
Other key appointments included Thérèse Coffey as deputy prime minister and health secretary, Jacob Rees-Mogg as business secretary, Kemi Badenoch as secretary of state for international trade, Kit Malthouse as education secretary, Penny Mordaunt as leader of the House of Commons and Michelle Donelan as culture secretary. 189  Truss retained Ben Wallace as defence secretary, Alok Sharma as president for COP26, Alister Jack as Scotland secretary, Robert Buckland as Wales secretary, and James Heappey as minister of state for the armed forces and veterans. 190 
Truss was the fifteenth and final British prime minister to serve under Elizabeth II, who died on 8 September, two days after appointing Truss. 191  She was told of the Queen's ill health in the early morning; Truss ordered black clothes from Greenwich in the event of her death. A witness said that " knew it would be that day but she had to go to the Commons to pretend everything was normal". 192  Upon Elizabeth's death, Truss delivered a statement outside 10 Downing Street paying tribute to her, saying "Queen Elizabeth II was the rock on which modern Britain was built. Our country has grown and flourished under her reign. Britain is the great country it is today because of her". 193  On 10 September, Truss attended the accession ceremony of Charles III and took an oath of allegiance to the King with fellow senior MPs, 194  195  and attended the Queen's funeraI service in Westminster Abbey on 19 September, reading the second lesson. 196 
On 8 September, in response to the ongoing cost of living crisis, Truss unveiled a two-year cap on the price of domestic energy supplies —the Energy Price Guarantee— which was planned to cap average household energy bills at £2,500 per year; 197  the plan cost between 70 and £140 billion. 198  199  Truss, who announced the measure in the House of Commons, made an effort to keep the energy cap and tax plan announcements separate. 200 
On 23 September, Kwarteng announced a controversial mini-budget which proposed cutting taxation significantly, including abolishing the 45 per cent rate of tax, cutting the basic rate of income tax, cancelling rises in national insurance contributions and corporation tax, abolishing the proposed Health and Social Care Levy, and cutting stamp duty; the package was to be funded by borrowing. 201  The mini-budget was received badly by financial markets, blamed for the pound falling to its lowest ever rate against the US dollar,  202  and prompted a response from the Bank of England. 203  204  The mini-budget was criticised by the IMF, 205  206  US president Joe Biden, 207  the opposition Labour Party and many within Truss's party, including senior politicians Michael Gove and Grant Shapps. 208 
I think it's a shambles and a disgrace ... I hope all those people that put Liz Truss into Number 10, I hope it was worth it. I hope it was worth it for the ministerial red box, I hope it was worth it to sit round the Cabinet table because the damage they have done to our party is extraordinary.
Charles Walker's remarks on the market fallout, subsequent government crisis and Conservative unpopularity. 209 
After initially defending the mini-budget, Truss instructed Kwarteng to reverse the abolition of the 45 per cent income tax additional rate on 3 October. 210  She later reversed the cut in corporation tax and dismissed Kwarteng, replacing him with Jeremy Hunt on 14 October, 208  who reversed many of the remaining policies announced in the mini-budget; 211  due to Truss's perceived weakness, Hunt was jokingly described as the de facto prime minister. 212  213  During this time, Truss became increasingly unpopular with the public, and contributed to a large fall in support for the Conservatives; 214  in October, she became the most unpopular prime minister in British history, 215  with her personal approval rating recorded as nine per cent. 216  She was pilloried in national and international press as a u-turner, 217  218  219  and a chaotic vote on fracking along with the resignation of Suella Braverman as home secretary compounded a rapid deterioration of confidence in her leadership. 220  On 19 October, in response to a question by Keir Starmer, Truss stated that she was a "fighter and not a quitter", quoting a 2001 phrase by Peter Mandelson. 221 
Shortly before noon on 20 October, Truss's 45th day in office, Graham Brady, the leader of the 1922 Committee, held a meeting with Truss, where she asked if she would be able to remain in office: his response was "I don't think so, prime minister". 222  At 1:35 pm, Truss announced her resignation as the leader of the Conservative Party and as prime minister. She gave the following 89–second–long statement:
I came into office at a time of great economic and international instability. Families and businesses were worried about how to pay their bills. Putin's illegal war in Ukraine threatens the security of our whole continent. And our country has been held back by too long by low economic growth. I was elected by the Conservative Party with a mandate to change this. We delivered on energy bills and on cutting National Insurance. And we set out a vision for a low-tax, high-growth economy that would take advantage of the freedoms of Brexit. I recognise though, given the situation, I cannot deliver the mandate on which I was elected by the Conservative Party. I have therefore spoken to His Majesty the King to notify him that I am resigning as leader of the Conservative Party. This morning I met the chairman of the 1922 Committee, Sir Graham Brady. We have agreed there will be a leadership election to be completed within the next week. This will ensure that we remain on a path to deliver our fiscal plans and maintain our country's economic stability and national security. I will remain as prime minister until a successor has been chosen. Thank you. 223 Her resignation as prime minister was accepted by Charles III at an audience at Buckingham Palace. She was succeeded by Sunak as leader of the Conservative Party on 24 October, and advised the King to appoint him as the new prime minister on 25 October. 224  225  Truss became the shortest-serving prime minister in British history, surpassing George Canning, who was prime minister for 119 days. 223  The short length of her premiership was the subject of much ridicule, including a livestream of a head of lettuce comparing the shelf-life of the vegetable to her remaining tenure. 226 
Truss is known for her economically liberal views and her support for free trade. 227  She supports the neoliberal philosophy of supply-side economics, often referred to derogatorily as "trickle-down economics". 228  229  230  She founded the Free Enterprise Group of Conservative MPs, a pro-free market collection of parliamentarians arguing for a more entrepreneurial economy and fewer employment laws. 231  After the September 2022 mini-budget, Truss fired her Chancellor of the Exchequer, Kwasi Kwarteng, after 38 days in office. 232  She replaced him with Jeremy Hunt, leading Faisal Islam of BBC News to write that "Trussonomics" is effectively dead. 233 
Truss was described as a hawkish foreign secretary. 234  She has called for Britain to reduce economic dependency on China and Russia and has supported certain diplomatic and economic sanctions imposed by the British government against China, including barring the Chinese ambassador to the UK Zheng Zeguang from entering Parliament, in response to China's retaliatory sanctions due to Xinjiang. 235  236  She accused Rishi Sunak of "seeking closer economic relations" with China. 237  Truss has been a strong supporter of Taiwan in the context of deteriorating cross strait relations, but, citing precedent, has said she would not visit the island nation if she was elected prime minister. 238  239  240  She described the Chinese government's treatment of the Uyghur people as "genocide". 241  242 
She stated that the UK and Turkey are "key European NATO allies" and called for UK–Turkey cooperation on "energy, defence and security" to be deepened. 243  Truss said she would continue to support Cyprus in its "efforts for reunification under international law and in helping find a peaceful and lasting solution" to the Cyprus conflict between Greek Cypriots and Turkish-backed Turkish Cypriot separatists. 244 
In 2022 she called Saudi Arabia an "ally", but said she was not "condoning" the country's policies. 176  245  Truss promised to "review" moving the British embassy in Israel from Tel Aviv to Jerusalem. 246 
Truss supported the United Kingdom's remaining in the European Union during the 2016 referendum. 247 
Since the referendum, Truss has supported Brexit; in 2017, she said that if another referendum were held, she would vote for Brexit, saying: "I believed there would be massive economic problems but those haven't come to pass and I've also seen the opportunities." 248  In the July 2022 Conservative Party leadership election, Truss said of her support for Remain that "I was wrong and I am prepared to admit I was wrong". 249  She added that "some of the portents of doom didn't happen and instead we have actually unleashed new opportunities" after Brexit. 249  Her support of Brexit during these debates made her popular with the Conservative party members who selected her as prime minister during this leadership election. 250 
On culture, Truss has said that the Conservative Party should "reject the zero-sum game of identity politics, we reject the illiberalism of cancel culture, and we reject the soft bigotry of low expectations that holds so many people back". 251  She has also suggested that Britain should not ignore the history of the British Empire, but should embrace the country's history "warts and all" if it is to compete with hostile states. 252  In 2021, Truss voted to decriminalise abortion in Northern Ireland and abstained from voting on the introduction of "buffer zones" outside of abortion clinics. 253 
On LGBTQ+ rights, Truss, according to Reuters, voted for gay marriage and has never voted against LGBTQ+ rights, but has also moved to limit transgender rights. 254  She spoke against gender self-identification, stating that "medical checks are important". She said that she agreed that "only women have a cervix". 255  She also stated that the government departments should withdraw from Stonewall's diversity champions scheme. 256  Despite initially supporting single-sex services being restricted on the basis of biological sex, she later said in February 2022 that the Government was not interested in enacting such a measure. 257 
Truss signed the Conservative Environment Pledge on the website of the Conservative Environment Network , 258  259  which has the support of 127 Conservative MPs. 260  By signing the CEN pledge, Truss committed to achieving the UK's net-zero target on reducing greenhouse gas emissions by 2050 259  261  and in 2022, said that she wanted to do this "in a way that doesn't harm businesses or consumers". 262  As part of the energy crisis measures, a temporary suspension of green levies on domestic bills starting on 1 October was announced by the Government, 263  with schemes previously funded by the levies now being funded by government. 264 
As reported in The Daily Telegraph, Truss planned to scrap an environmental rule called the "nutrient neutrality" requirement. 265  This rule requires details from the developers about how their proposals might pollute rivers and wetlands and is implemented by the non-departmental public body Natural England. 265  UK Government support for nutrient neutrality is outlined in a policy paper from March 2022 "Nutrient pollution: reducing the impact on protected sites". 266 
As part of a two-year plan to ensure British energy security, Truss's government issued the 33rd round of offshore licences on 7 October 2022  with as many as 100 set to be awarded. 267  268  Nearly 900 locations are being offered for exploration, with a fast-track for parts of the North Sea near existing infrastructure. 267  268  Opposition has come from Greenpeace, among others, who say that this energy policy benefits fossil-fuel companies and will have little impact on prices. 267 
The ban on fracking for shale gas was lifted in September 2022 as the moratorium in place since 2019 was scrapped. 269  270  The lifting of the ban has given companies the go-ahead to apply for planning permission to extract shale gas in the U.K. 269  Fracking was banned by the government in November 2019 after a report by the Oil and Gas Authority found that it was not possible at that time to predict the probability or strength of earthquakes caused by fracking. 271  272 
As part of the Growth Plan set out by her government in September 2022, proposals were made to limit the ability of councils in England to block the construction of onshore windfarms, a reversal of policy implemented in 2016 as part of the National Planning Policy Framework. 273  274  The government said that it would bring UK planning policy for onshore wind farming in line with existing rules, which could allow infrastructure to be more easily deployed. 273 
Notes.mw-parser-output .reflist.mw-parser-output .reflist .references.mw-parser-output .reflist-columns-2.mw-parser-output .reflist-columns-3.mw-parser-output .reflist-columns.mw-parser-output .reflist-columns ol.mw-parser-output .reflist-columns li.mw-parser-output .reflist-upper-alpha.mw-parser-output .reflist-upper-roman.mw-parser-output .reflist-lower-alpha.mw-parser-output .reflist-lower-greek.mw-parser-output .reflist-lower-romanReferences